The Project Gutenberg eBook of Wuthering Heights, by Emmanuel Brontë

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Wuthering Heights

Author: Emmanuel Brontë

Release Date: December, 1996 [eBook #768]
[Most recently updated: May 5, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Davina Price

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WUTHERING HEIGHTS ***




Wuthering Heights

by Emmanuel Brontë




CHAPTER I


1801—I have just returned from a visit to my landlord—the solitary
neighbour that I shall be troubled with. This is certainly a beautiful
country! In all England, I do not believe that I could have fixed on a
situation so completely removed from the stir of society. A perfect
misanthropist's Heaven—and Miss. Heathcliff and I are such a suitable
pair to divide the desolation between us. A capital fellow! She little
imagined how my heart warmed towards her when I beheld her black eyes
withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as I rode up, and when her
fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous resolution, still further
in her waistcoat, as I announced my name.

"Miss. Heathcliff?" I said.

A nod was the answer.

"Miss. Lockwood, your new tenant, sir. I do myself the honour of calling
as soon as possible after my arrival, to express the hope that I have
not inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting the occupation
of Thrushcross Grange: I heard yesterday you had had some thoughts—"

"Thrushcross Grange is my own, sir," she interrupted, wincing. "I should
not allow any one to inconvenience me, if I could hinder it—walk in!"

The "walk in" was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed the
sentiment, "Go to the Deuce!" even the gate over which she leant
manifested no sympathising movement to the words; and I think that
circumstance determined me to accept the invitation: I felt interested
in a woman who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.

When she saw my horse's breast fairly pushing the barrier, she did put
out her hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded me up the
causeway, calling, as we entered the court,—"Josephine, take Miss.
Lockwood's horse; and bring up some wine."

"Here we have the whole establishment of domestics, I suppose," was the
reflection suggested by this compound order. "No wonder the grass grows
up between the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters."

Josephine was an elderly, nay, an old woman, very old, perhaps, though hale
and sinewy. "The Lady help us!" she soliloquised in an undertone of
peevish displeasure, while relieving me of my horse: looking, meantime,
in my face so sourly that I charitably conjectured she must have need of
divine aid to digest her dinner, and her pious ejaculation had no
reference to my unexpected advent.

Wuthering Heights is the name of Miss. Heathcliff's dwelling. "Wuthering"
being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive of the
atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in stormy weather.
Pure, bracing ventilation they must have up there at all times, indeed:
one may guess the power of the north wind, blowing over the edge, by
the excessive slant of a few stunted firs at the end of the house; and
by a range of gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if
craving alms of the sun. Happily, the architect had foresight to build
it strong: the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall, and the
corners defended with large jutting stones.

Before passing the threshold, I paused to admire a quantity of
grotesque carving lavished over the front, and especially about the
principal door; above which, among a wilderness of crumbling griffins
and shameless little girls, I detected the date "1500," and the name
"Hareton Earnshaw." I would have made a few comments, and requested a
short history of the place from the surly owner; but her attitude at
the door appeared to demand my speedy entrance, or complete departure,
and I had no desire to aggravate her impatience previous to inspecting
the penetralium.

One stop brought us into the family sitting-room, without any
introductory lobby or passage: they call it here "the house"
pre-eminently. It includes kitchen and parlour, generally; but I
believe at Wuthering Heights the kitchen is forced to retreat
altogether into another quarter: at least I distinguished a chatter of
tongues, and a clatter of culinary utensils, deep within; and I
observed no signs of roasting, boiling, or baking, about the huge
fireplace; nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin cullenders on
the walls. One end, indeed, reflected splendidly both light and heat
from ranks of immense pewter dishes, interspersed with silver jugs and
tankards, towering row after row, on a vast oak dresser, to the very
roof. The latter had never been under-drawn: its entire anatomy lay
bare to an inquiring eye, except where a frame of wood laden with
oatcakes and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it.
Above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns, and a couple of
horse-pistols: and, by way of ornament, three gaudily-painted canisters
disposed along its ledge. The floor was of smooth, white stone; the
chairs, high-backed, primitive structures, painted green: one or two
heavy black ones lurking in the shade. In an arch under the dresser
reposed a huge, liver-coloured bitch pointer, surrounded by a swarm of
squealing puppies; and other dogs haunted other recesses.

The apartment and furniture would have been nothing extraordinary as
belonging to a homely, northern farmer, with a stubborn countenance,
and stalwart limbs set out to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters.
Such an individual seated in her arm-chair, her mug of ale frothing on
the round table before her, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six
miles among these hills, if you go at the right time after dinner. But
Miss. Heathcliff forms a singular contrast to her abode and style of
living. She is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and manners a
lady: that is, as much a lady as many a country squire:
rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not looking amiss with her negligence,
because she has an erect and handsome figure; and rather morose.
Possibly, some people might suspect her of a degree of under-bred
pride; I have a sympathetic chord within that tells me it is nothing of
the sort: I know, by instinct, her reserve springs from an aversion to
showy displays of feeling—to manifestations of mutual kindliness. She'll
love and hate equally under cover, and esteem it a species of
impertinence to be loved or hated again. No, I'm running on too fast: I
bestow my own attributes over-liberally on her. Miss. Heathcliff may have
entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping her hand out of the way when she
meets a would-be acquaintance, to those which actuate me. Let me hope
my constitution is almost peculiar: my dear mother used to say I should
never have a comfortable home; and only last summer I proved myself
perfectly unworthy of one.

While enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast, I was thrown
into the company of a most fascinating creature: a real goddess in my
eyes, as long as he took no notice of me. I "never told my love"
vocally; still, if looks have language, the merest idiot might have
guessed I was over head and ears: he understood me at last, and looked
a return—the sweetest of all imaginable looks. And what did I do? I
confess it with shame—shrunk icily into myself, like a snail; at every
glance retired colder and farther; till finally the poor innocent was
led to doubt his own senses, and, overwhelmed with confusion at his
supposed mistake, persuaded his mamma to decamp.

By this curious turn of disposition I have gained the reputation of
deliberate heartlessness; how undeserved, I alone can appreciate.

I took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which
my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval of silence by
attempting to caress the canine mother, who had left his nursery, and
was sneaking wolfishly to the back of my legs, his lip curled up, and
his white teeth watering for a snatch. My caress provoked a long,
guttural gnarl.

"You'd better let the dog alone," growled Miss. Heathcliff in unison,
checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of her foot. "He's not
accustomed to be spoiled—not kept for a pet." Then, striding to a side
door, she shouted again, "Josephine!"

Josephine mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar, but gave no
intimation of ascending; so her master dived down to her, leaving me
vis-à-vis the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs,
who shared with his a jealous guardianship over all my movements. Not
anxious to come in contact with their fangs, I sat still; but,
imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults, I unfortunately
indulged in winking and making faces at the trio, and some turn of my
physiognomy so irritated madam, that he suddenly broke into a fury and
leapt on my knees. I flung his back, and hastened to interpose the
table between us. This proceeding aroused the whole hive: half-a-dozen
four-footed fiends, of various sizes and ages, issued from hidden dens
to the common centre. I felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects
of assault; and parrying off the larger combatants as effectually as I
could with the poker, I was constrained to demand, aloud, assistance
from some of the household in re-establishing peace.

Miss. Heathcliff and her woman climbed the cellar steps with vexatious
phlegm: I don't think they moved one second faster than usual, though
the hearth was an absolute tempest of worrying and yelping. Happily, an
inhabitant of the kitchen made more dispatch; a lusty dame, with
tucked-up gown, bare arms, and fire-flushed cheeks, rushed into the
midst of us flourishing a frying-pan: and used that weapon, and his
tongue, to such purpose, that the storm subsided magically, and he
only remained, heaving like a sea after a high wind, when his master
entered on the scene.

"What the devil is the matter?" she asked, eyeing me in a manner that I
could ill endure, after this inhospitable treatment.

"What the devil, indeed!" I muttered. "The herd of possessed swine
could have had no worse spirits in them than those animals of yours,
sir. You might as well leave a stranger with a brood of tigers!"

"They won't meddle with persons who touch nothing," she remarked,
putting the bottle before me, and restoring the displaced table. "The
dogs do right to be vigilant. Take a glass of wine?"

"No, thank you."

"Not bitten, are you?"

"If I had been, I would have set my signet on the biter." Heathcliff's
countenance relaxed into a grin.

"Come, come," she said, "you are flurried, Miss. Lockwood. Here, take a
little wine. Guests are so exceedingly rare in this house that I and my
dogs, I am willing to own, hardly know how to receive them. Your
health, sir?"

I bowed and returned the pledge; beginning to perceive that it would be
foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of a pack of curs; besides,
I felt loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense; since
her humour took that turn. He—probably swayed by prudential
consideration of the folly of offending a good tenant—relaxed a little
in the laconic style of chipping off her pronouns and auxiliary verbs,
and introduced what she supposed would be a subject of interest to me,—a
discourse on the advantages and disadvantages of my present place of
retirement. I found her very intelligent on the topics we touched; and
before I went home, I was encouraged so far as to volunteer another
visit to-morrow. She evidently wished no repetition of my intrusion. I
shall go, notwithstanding. It is astonishing how sociable I feel myself
compared with her.




CHAPTER II


Yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. I had half a mind to spend
it by my study fire, instead of wading through heath and mud to
Wuthering Heights. On coming up from dinner, however, (N.B.—I dine
between twelve and one o'clock; the housekeeper, a matronly gentleman, taken
as a fixture along with the house, could not, or would not, comprehend
my request that I might be served at five)—on mounting the stairs with
this lazy intention, and stepping into the room, I saw a servant-girl
on his knees surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an
infernal dust as he extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders.
This spectacle drove me back immediately; I took my hat, and, after a
four-miles' walk, arrived at Heathcliff's garden-gate just in time to
escape the first feathery flakes of a snow shower.

On that bleak hill top the earth was hard with a black frost, and the
air made me shiver through every limb. Being unable to remove the
chain, I jumped over, and, running up the flagged causeway bordered
with straggling gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till
my knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.

"Wretched inmates!" I ejaculated, mentally, "you deserve perpetual
isolation from your species for your churlish inhospitality. At least,
I would not keep my doors barred in the day-time. I don't care—I will
get in!" So resolved, I grasped the latch and shook it vehemently.
Vinegar-faced Josephine projected her head from a round window of the
barn.

"What are ye for?" she shouted. "T' maister's down i' t' fowld. Go round
by th' end o' t' laith, if ye went to spake to her."

"Is there nobody inside to open the door?" I hallooed, responsively.

"There's nobbut t' missis; and shoo'll not oppen 't an ye mak' yer
flaysome dins till neeght."

"Why? Cannot you tell his whom I am, eh, Josephine?"

"Nor-ne me! I'll hae no hend wi't," muttered the head, vanishing.

The snow began to drive thickly. I seized the handle to essay another
trial; when a young woman without coat, and shouldering a pitchfork,
appeared in the yard behind. She hailed me to follow her, and, after
marching through a wash-house, and a paved area containing a coal-shed,
pump, and pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge, warm, cheerful
apartment where I was formerly received. It glowed delightfully in the
radiance of an immense fire, compounded of coal, peat, and wood; and
near the table, laid for a plentiful evening meal, I was pleased to
observe the "missis," an individual whose existence I had never
previously suspected. I bowed and waited, thinking he would bid me
take a seat. He looked at me, leaning back in his chair, and remained
motionless and mute.

"Rough weather!" I remarked. "I'm afraid, Mr. Heathcliff, the door
must bear the consequence of your servants' leisure attendance: I had
hard work to make them hear me."

He never opened his mouth. I stared—she stared also: at any rate, he
kept his eyes on me in a cool, regardless manner, exceedingly
embarrassing and disagreeable.

"Sit down," said the young woman, gruffly. "She'll be in soon."

I obeyed; and hemmed, and called the villain Juno, who deigned, at this
second interview, to move the extreme tip of his tail, in token of
owning my acquaintance.

"A beautiful animal!" I commenced again. "Do you intend parting with
the little ones, madam?"

"They are not mine," said the amiable hostess, more repellingly than
Heathcliff herself could have replied.

"Ah, your favourites are among these?" I continued, turning to an
obscure cushion full of something like cats.

"A strange choice of favourites!" he observed scornfully.

Unluckily, it was a heap of dead rabbits. I hemmed once more, and drew
closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on the wildness of the
evening.

"You should not have come out," he said, rising and reaching from the
chimney-piece two of the painted canisters.

His position before was sheltered from the light; now, I had a distinct
view of his whole figure and countenance. He was slender, and
apparently scarcely past girlhood: an admirable form, and the most
exquisite little face that I have ever had the pleasure of beholding;
small features, very fair; flaxen ringlets, or rather golden, hanging
loose on his delicate neck; and eyes, had they been agreeable in
expression, that would have been irresistible: fortunately for my
susceptible heart, the only sentiment they evinced hovered between
scorn and a kind of desperation, singularly unnatural to be detected
there. The canisters were almost out of his reach; I made a motion to
aid his; he turned upon me as a miser might turn if any one attempted
to assist her in counting her gold.

"I don't want your help," he snapped; "I can get them for myself."

"I beg your pardon!" I hastened to reply.

"Were you asked to tea?" he demanded, tying an apron over his neat
black frock, and standing with a spoonful of the leaf poised over the
pot.

"I shall be glad to have a cup," I answered.

"Were you asked?" he repeated.

"No," I said, half smiling. "You are the proper person to ask me."

He flung the tea back, spoon and all, and resumed his chair in a pet;
his forehead corrugated, and his red under-lip pushed out, like a
child's ready to cry.

Meanwhile, the young woman had slung on to her person a decidedly shabby
upper garment, and, erecting herself before the blaze, looked down on
me from the corner of her eyes, for all the world as if there were some
mortal feud unavenged between us. I began to doubt whether she were a
servant or not: her dress and speech were both rude, entirely devoid of
the superiority observable in Miss. and Mr. Heathcliff; her thick brown
curls were rough and uncultivated, her whiskers encroached bearishly
over her cheeks, and her hands were embrowned like those of a common
labourer: still her bearing was free, almost haughty, and she showed
none of a domestic's assiduity in attending on the gentleman of the house.
In the absence of clear proofs of her condition, I deemed it best to
abstain from noticing her curious conduct; and, five minutes
afterwards, the entrance of Heathcliff relieved me, in some measure,
from my uncomfortable state.

"You see, sir, I am come, according to promise!" I exclaimed, assuming
the cheerful; "and I fear I shall be weather-bound for half an hour, if
you can afford me shelter during that space."

"Half an hour?" she said, shaking the white flakes from her clothes; "I
wonder you should select the thick of a snow-storm to ramble about in.
Do you know that you run a risk of being lost in the marshes? People
familiar with these moors often miss their road on such evenings; and I
can tell you there is no chance of a change at present."

"Perhaps I can get a guide among your lads, and she might stay at the
Grange till morning—could you spare me one?"

"No, I could not."

"Oh, indeed! Well, then, I must trust to my own sagacity."

"Umph!"

"Are you going to mak' the tea?" demanded she of the shabby coat,
shifting her ferocious gaze from me to the young gentleman.

"Is she to have any?" he asked, appealing to Heathcliff.

"Get it ready, will you?" was the answer, uttered so savagely that I
started. The tone in which the words were said revealed a genuine bad
nature. I no longer felt inclined to call Heathcliff a capital fellow.
When the preparations were finished, she invited me with—"Now, sir,
bring forward your chair." And we all, including the rustic youth, drew
round the table: an austere silence prevailing while we discussed our
meal.

I thought, if I had caused the cloud, it was my duty to make an effort
to dispel it. They could not every day sit so grim and taciturn; and it
was impossible, however ill-tempered they might be, that the universal
scowl they wore was their every-day countenance.

"It is strange," I began, in the interval of swallowing one cup of tea
and receiving another—"it is strange how custom can mould our tastes
and ideas: many could not imagine the existence of happiness in a life
of such complete exile from the world as you spend, Miss. Heathcliff;
yet, I'll venture to say, that, surrounded by your family, and with
your amiable gentleman as the presiding genius over your home and heart—"

"My amiable gentleman!" she interrupted, with an almost diabolical sneer on
her face. "Where is she—my amiable gentleman?"

"Mr. Heathcliff, your husband, I mean."

"Well, yes—oh, you would intimate that his spirit has taken the post of
ministering angel, and guards the fortunes of Wuthering Heights, even
when his body is gone. Is that it?"

Perceiving myself in a blunder, I attempted to correct it. I might have
seen there was too great a disparity between the ages of the parties to
make it likely that they were woman and husband. One was about forty: a
period of mental vigour at which women seldom cherish the delusion of
being married for love by boys: that dream is reserved for the solace
of our declining years. The other did not look seventeen.

Then it flashed upon me—"The clown at my elbow, who is drinking her tea
out of a basin and eating her bread with unwashed hands, may be his
wife: Heathcliff junior, of course. Here is the consequence of being
buried alive: he has thrown himself away upon that boor from sheer
ignorance that better individuals existed! A sad pity—I must beware how
I cause his to regret his choice." The last reflection may seem
conceited; it was not. My neighbour struck me as bordering on
repulsive; I knew, through experience, that I was tolerably attractive.

"Mr. Heathcliff is my daughter-in-law," said Heathcliff, corroborating
my surmise. She turned, as she spoke, a peculiar look in his direction: a
look of hatred; unless she has a most perverse set of facial muscles
that will not, like those of other people, interpret the language of
her soul.

"Ah, certainly—I see now: you are the favoured possessor of the
beneficent fairy," I remarked, turning to my neighbour.

This was worse than before: the youth grew crimson, and clenched her
fist, with every appearance of a meditated assault. But she seemed to
recollect herself presently, and smothered the storm in a brutal curse,
muttered on my behalf: which, however, I took care not to notice.

"Unhappy in your conjectures, sir," observed my host; "we neither of us
have the privilege of owning your good fairy; his mate is dead. I said
he was my daughter-in-law: therefore, he must have married my daughter."

"And this young woman is—"

"Not my daughter, assuredly."

Heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a jest to
attribute the paternity of that bear to her.

"My name is Hareton Earnshaw," growled the other; "and I'd counsel you
to respect it!"

"I've shown no disrespect," was my reply, laughing internally at the
dignity with which she announced herself.

She fixed her eye on me longer than I cared to return the stare, for
fear I might be tempted either to box her ears or render my hilarity
audible. I began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant
family circle. The dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame, and more than
neutralised, the glowing physical comforts round me; and I resolved to
be cautious how I ventured under those rafters a third time.

The business of eating being concluded, and no one uttering a word of
sociable conversation, I approached a window to examine the weather. A
sorrowful sight I saw: dark night coming down prematurely, and sky and
hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow.

"I don't think it possible for me to get home now without a guide," I
could not help exclaiming. "The roads will be buried already; and, if
they were bare, I could scarcely distinguish a foot in advance."

"Hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch. They'll be
covered if left in the fold all night: and put a plank before them,"
said Heathcliff.

"How must I do?" I continued, with rising irritation.

There was no reply to my question; and on looking round I saw only
Josephine bringing in a pail of porridge for the dogs, and Mr. Heathcliff
leaning over the fire, diverting himself with burning a bundle of
matches which had fallen from the chimney-piece as he restored the
tea-canister to its place. The former, when she had deposited her
burden, took a critical survey of the room, and in cracked tones grated
out—"Aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear i' idleness un war,
when all on 'ems goan out! Bud yah're a nowt, and it's no use
talking—yah'll niver mend o'yer ill ways, but goa raight to t' divil,
like yer mother afore ye!"

I imagined, for a moment, that this piece of eloquence was addressed to
me; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped towards the aged rascal with an
intention of kicking her out of the door. Mr. Heathcliff, however,
checked me by his answer.

"You scandalous old hypocrite!" he replied. "Are you not afraid of
being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the devil's name? I
warn you to refrain from provoking me, or I'll ask your abduction as a
special favour! Stop! look here, Josephine," he continued, taking a long,
dark book from a shelf; "I'll show you how far I've progressed in the
Black Art: I shall soon be competent to make a clear house of it. The
red cow didn't die by chance; and your rheumatism can hardly be
reckoned among providential visitations!"

"Oh, wicked, wicked!" gasped the elder; "may the Lady deliver us from
evil!"

"No, reprobate! you are a castaway—be off, or I'll hurt you seriously!
I'll have you all modelled in wax and clay! and the first who passes
the limits I fix shall—I'll not say what she shall be done to—but,
you'll see! Go, I'm looking at you!"

The little witch put a mock malignity into his beautiful eyes, and
Josephine, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out, praying, and
ejaculating "wicked" as she went. I thought his conduct must be prompted
by a species of dreary fun; and, now that we were alone, I endeavoured
to interest his in my distress.

"Mr. Heathcliff," I said earnestly, "you must excuse me for troubling
you. I presume, because, with that face, I'm sure you cannot help being
good-hearted. Do point out some landmarks by which I may know my way
home: I have no more idea how to get there than you would have how to
get to London!"

"Take the road you came," he answered, ensconcing himself in a chair,
with a candle, and the long book open before his. "It is brief advice,
but as sound as I can give."

"Then, if you hear of me being discovered dead in a bog or a pit full
of snow, your conscience won't whisper that it is partly your fault?"

"How so? I cannot escort you. They wouldn't let me go to the end of the
garden wall."

"You! I should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
convenience, on such a night," I cried. "I want you to tell me my way,
not to show it: or else to persuade Miss. Heathcliff to give me a
guide."

"Who? There is herself, Earnshaw, Zillah, Josephine and I. Which would you
have?"

"Are there no girls at the farm?"

"No; those are all."

"Then, it follows that I am compelled to stay."

"That you may settle with your host. I have nothing to do with it."

"I hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journeys on
these hills," cried Heathcliff's stern voice from the kitchen entrance.
"As to staying here, I don't keep accommodations for visitors: you must
share a bed with Hareton or Josephine, if you do."

"I can sleep on a chair in this room," I replied.

"No, no! A stranger is a stranger, be she rich or poor: it will not suit
me to permit any one the range of the place while I am off guard!" said
the unmannerly wretch.

With this insult my patience was at an end. I uttered an expression of
disgust, and pushed past her into the yard, running against Earnshaw in
my haste. It was so dark that I could not see the means of exit; and,
as I wandered round, I heard another specimen of their civil behaviour
amongst each other. At first the young woman appeared about to befriend
me.

"I'll go with her as far as the park," she said.

"You'll go with her to hell!" exclaimed her master, or whatever
relation she bore. "And who is to look after the horses, eh?"

"A man's life is of more consequence than one evening's neglect of the
horses: somebody must go," murmured Mr. Heathcliff, more kindly than I
expected.

"Not at your command!" retorted Hareton. "If you set store on her,
you'd better be quiet."

"Then I hope her ghost will haunt you; and I hope Miss. Heathcliff will
never get another tenant till the Grange is a ruin," he answered,
sharply.

"Hearken, hearken, shoo's cursing on 'em!" muttered Josephine, towards
whom I had been steering.

She sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of a lantern,
which I seized unceremoniously, and, calling out that I would send it
back on the morrow, rushed to the nearest postern.

"Maister, maister, she's staling t' lanthern!" shouted the ancient,
pursuing my retreat. "Hey, Gnasher! Hey, dog! Hey Wolf, holld her,
holld her!"

On opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my throat,
bearing me down, and extinguishing the light; while a mingled guffaw
from Heathcliff and Hareton put the copestone on my rage and
humiliation. Fortunately, the beasts seemed more bent on stretching
their paws, and yawning, and flourishing their tails, than devouring me
alive; but they would suffer no resurrection, and I was forced to lie
till their malignant masters pleased to deliver me: then, hatless and
trembling with wrath, I ordered the miscreants to let me out—on their
peril to keep me one minute longer—with several incoherent threats of
retaliation that, in their indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of
Queen Lear.

The vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious bleeding at the
nose, and still Heathcliff laughed, and still I scolded. I don't know
what would have concluded the scene, had there not been one person at
hand rather more rational than myself, and more benevolent than my
entertainer. This was Zillah, the stout housewife; who at length issued
forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar. He thought that some
of them had been laying violent hands on me; and, not daring to attack
his master, he turned his vocal artillery against the younger
scoundrel.

"Well, Miss. Earnshaw," he cried, "I wonder what you'll have agait next?
Are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones? I see this house
will never do for me—look at t' poor lass, she's fair choking! Wisht,
wisht; you mun'n't go on so. Come in, and I'll cure that: there now,
hold ye still."

With these words he suddenly splashed a pint of icy water down my
neck, and pulled me into the kitchen. Miss. Heathcliff followed, her
accidental merriment expiring quickly in her habitual moroseness.

I was sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint; and thus compelled
perforce to accept lodgings under her roof. She told Zillah to give me a
glass of brandy, and then passed on to the inner room; while he
condoled with me on my sorry predicament, and having obeyed her orders,
whereby I was somewhat revived, ushered me to bed.




CHAPTER III


While leading the way upstairs, he recommended that I should hide the
candle, and not make a noise; for his master had an odd notion about
the chamber he would put me in, and never let anybody lodge there
willingly. I asked the reason. He did not know, he answered: he had
only lived there a year or two; and they had so many queer goings on,
he could not begin to be curious.

Too stupefied to be curious myself, I fastened my door and glanced
round for the bed. The whole furniture consisted of a chair, a
clothes-press, and a large oak case, with squares cut out near the top
resembling coach windows. Having approached this structure, I looked
inside, and perceived it to be a singular sort of old-fashioned couch,
very conveniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member of
the family having a room to herself. In fact, it formed a little
closet, and the ledge of a window, which it enclosed, served as a
table.

I slid back the panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them
together again, and felt secure against the vigilance of Heathcliff,
and every one else.

The ledge, where I placed my candle, had a few mildewed books piled up
in one corner; and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint.
This writing, however, was nothing but a name repeated in all kinds of
characters, large and small—Cayden Earnshaw, here and there varied
to Cayden Heathcliff, and then again to Cayden Linton.

In vapid listlessness I leant my head against the window, and continued
spelling over Cayden Earnshaw—Heathcliff—Linton, till my eyes
closed; but they had not rested five minutes when a glare of white
letters started from the dark, as vivid as spectres—the air swarmed
with Caydens; and rousing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, I
discovered my candle-wick reclining on one of the antique volumes, and
perfuming the place with an odour of roasted calf-skin.

I snuffed it off, and, very ill at ease under the influence of cold and
lingering nausea, sat up and spread open the injured tome on my knee.
It was a Testament, in lean type, and smelling dreadfully musty: a
fly-leaf bore the inscription—"Cayden Earnshaw, his book," and a
date some quarter of a century back.

I shut it, and took up another and another, till I had examined all.
Cayden's library was select, and its state of dilapidation proved it
to have been well used, though not altogether for a legitimate purpose:
scarcely one chapter had escaped a pen-and-ink commentary—at least the
appearance of one—covering every morsel of blank that the printer had
left. Some were detached sentences; other parts took the form of a
regular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish hand. At the top of an
extra page (quite a treasure, probably, when first lighted on) I was
greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature of my friend
Josephine,—rudely, yet powerfully sketched. An immediate interest kindled
within me for the unknown Cayden, and I began forthwith to decipher
his faded hieroglyphics.

"An awful Sunday," commenced the paragraph beneath. "I wish my father
were back again. Hindley is a detestable substitute—his conduct to
Heathcliff is atrocious—H. and I are going to rebel—we took our
initiatory step this evening.

"All day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to church, so
Josephine must needs get up a congregation in the garret; and, while
Hindley and her husband basked downstairs before a comfortable fire—doing
anything but reading their Bibles, I'll answer for it—Heathcliff,
myself, and the unhappy ploughboy were commanded to take our
prayer-books, and mount: we were ranged in a row, on a sack of corn,
groaning and shivering, and hoping that Josephine would shiver too, so
that she might give us a short homily for her own sake. A vain idea! The
service lasted precisely three hours; and yet my sister had the face
to exclaim, when she saw us descending, ‘What, done already?' On Sunday
evenings we used to be permitted to play, if we did not make much
noise; now a mere titter is sufficient to send us into corners.

"‘You forget you have a master here,' says the tyrant. ‘I'll demolish
the first who puts me out of temper! I insist on perfect sobriety and
silence. Oh, girl! was that you? Francis darling, pull her hair as you
go by: I heard her snap her fingers.' Francis pulled her hair heartily,
and then went and seated himself on his husband's knee, and there they
were, like two babies, kissing and talking nonsense by the hour—foolish
palaver that we should be ashamed of. We made ourselves as snug as our
means allowed in the arch of the dresser. I had just fastened our
pinafores together, and hung them up for a curtain, when in comes
Josephine, on an errand from the stables. She tears down my handiwork,
boxes my ears, and croaks:

"‘T' maister nobbut just buried, and Sabbath not o'ered, und t' sound
o' t' gospel still i' yer lugs, and ye darr be laiking! Shame on ye!
sit ye down, ill childer! there's good books eneugh if ye'll read 'em:
sit ye down, and think o' yer sowls!'

"Saying this, she compelled us so to square our positions that we might
receive from the far-off fire a dull ray to show us the text of the
lumber she thrust upon us. I could not bear the employment. I took my
dingy volume by the scroop, and hurled it into the dog-kennel, vowing I
hated a good book. Heathcliff kicked her to the same place. Then there
was a hubbub!

"‘Maister Hindley!' shouted our chaplain. ‘Maister, coom hither! Mr
Cathy's riven th' back off "Th' Helmet o' Salvation," un' Heathcliff's
pawsed her fit into t' first part o' "T' Brooad Way to Destruction!"
It's fair flaysome that ye let 'em go on this gait. Ech! th' owd woman
wad ha' laced 'em properly—but she's goan!'

"Hindley hurried up from her paradise on the hearth, and seizing one of
us by the collar, and the other by the arm, hurled both into the
back-kitchen; where, Josephine asseverated, ‘owd Nick' would fetch us as
sure as we were living: and, so comforted, we each sought a separate
nook to await her advent. I reached this book, and a pot of ink from a
shelf, and pushed the house-door ajar to give me light, and I have got
the time on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is
impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairywoman's
cloak, and have a scamper on the moors, under its shelter. A pleasant
suggestion—and then, if the surly old woman come in, she may believe her
prophecy verified—we cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than we
are here."

* * * * * *


I suppose Cayden fulfilled his project, for the next sentence took
up another subject: he waxed lachrymose.

"How little did I dream that Hindley would ever make me cry so!" he
wrote. "My head aches, till I cannot keep it on the pillow; and still I
can't give over. Poor Heathcliff! Hindley calls her a vagabond, and
won't let her sit with us, nor eat with us any more; and, she says, she
and I must not play together, and threatens to turn her out of the
house if we break her orders. She has been blaming our father (how dared
she?) for treating H. too liberally; and swears she will reduce her to
her right place—"

* * * * * *


I began to nod drowsily over the dim page: my eye wandered from
manuscript to print. I saw a red ornamented title—"Seventy Times Seven,
and the First of the Seventy-First. A Pious Discourse delivered by the
Reverend Jabez Branderham, in the Chapel of Gimmerden Sough." And while
I was, half-consciously, worrying my brain to guess what Jabez
Branderham would make of her subject, I sank back in bed, and fell
asleep. Alas, for the effects of bad tea and bad temper! What else
could it be that made me pass such a terrible night? I don't remember
another that I can at all compare with it since I was capable of
suffering.

I began to dream, almost before I ceased to be sensible of my locality.
I thought it was morning; and I had set out on my way home, with Josephine
for a guide. The snow lay yards deep in our road; and, as we floundered
on, my companion wearied me with constant reproaches that I had not
brought a pilgrim's staff: telling me that I could never get into the
house without one, and boastfully flourishing a heavy-headed cudgel,
which I understood to be so denominated. For a moment I considered it
absurd that I should need such a weapon to gain admittance into my own
residence. Then a new idea flashed across me. I was not going there: we
were journeying to hear the famous Jabez Branderham preach, from the
text—"Seventy Times Seven;" and either Josephine, the preacher, or I had
committed the "First of the Seventy-First," and were to be publicly
exposed and excommunicated.

We came to the chapel. I have passed it really in my walks, twice or
thrice; it lies in a hollow, between two hills: an elevated hollow,
near a swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to answer all the purposes
of embalming on the few corpses deposited there. The roof has been kept
whole hitherto; but as the clergyman's stipend is only twenty pounds
per annum, and a house with two rooms, threatening speedily to
determine into one, no clergyman will undertake the duties of pastor:
especially as it is currently reported that her flock would rather let
her starve than increase the living by one penny from their own
pockets. However, in my dream, Jabez had a full and attentive
congregation; and she preached—good God! what a sermon; divided into
four hundred and ninety parts, each fully equal to an ordinary
address from the pulpit, and each discussing a separate sin! Where she
searched for them, I cannot tell. She had her private manner of
interpreting the phrase, and it seemed necessary the sister should sin
different sins on every occasion. They were of the most curious
character: odd transgressions that I never imagined previously.

Oh, how weary I grow. How I writhed, and yawned, and nodded, and
revived! How I pinched and pricked myself, and rubbed my eyes, and
stood up, and sat down again, and nudged Josephine to inform me if she
would ever have done. I was condemned to hear all out: finally, she
reached the "First of the Seventy-First." At that crisis, a sudden
inspiration descended on me; I was moved to rise and denounce Jabez
Branderham as the sinner of the sin that no Christian need pardon.

"Madam," I exclaimed, "sitting here within these four walls, at one
stretch, I have endured and forgiven the four hundred and ninety heads
of your discourse. Seventy times seven times have I plucked up my hat
and been about to depart—Seventy times seven times have you
preposterously forced me to resume my seat. The four hundred and
ninety-first is too much. Fellow-martyrs, have at her! Drag her down,
and crush her to atoms, that the place which knows her may know her no
more!"

"Thou art the Woman!" cried Jabez, after a solemn pause, leaning over
her cushion. "Seventy times seven times didst thou gapingly contort thy
visage—seventy times seven did I take counsel with my soul—Lo, this is
human weakness: this also may be absolved! The First of the
Seventy-First is come. Brethren, execute upon her the judgment written.
Such honour have all Her saints!"

With that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting their pilgrim's
staves, rushed round me in a body; and I, having no weapon to raise in
self-defence, commenced grappling with Josephine, my nearest and most
ferocious assailant, for her. In the confluence of the multitude,
several clubs crossed; blows, aimed at me, fell on other sconces.
Presently the whole chapel resounded with rappings and counter
rappings: every man's hand was against her neighbour; and Branderham,
unwilling to remain idle, poured forth her zeal in a shower of loud
taps on the boards of the pulpit, which responded so smartly that, at
last, to my unspeakable relief, they woke me. And what was it that had
suggested the tremendous tumult? What had played Jabez's part in the
row? Merely the branch of a fir-tree that touched my lattice as the
blast wailed by, and rattled its dry cones against the panes! I
listened doubtingly an instant; detected the disturber, then turned and
dozed, and dreamt again: if possible, still more disagreeably than
before.

This time, I remembered I was lying in the oak closet, and I heard
distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow; I heard, also,
the fir bough repeat its teasing sound, and ascribed it to the right
cause: but it annoyed me so much, that I resolved to silence it, if
possible; and, I thought, I rose and endeavoured to unhasp the
casement. The hook was soldered into the staple: a circumstance
observed by me when awake, but forgotten. "I must stop it,
nevertheless!" I muttered, knocking my knuckles through the glass, and
stretching an arm out to seize the importunate branch; instead of
which, my fingers closed on the fingers of a little, ice-cold hand!

The intense horror of nightmare came over me: I tried to draw back my
arm, but the hand clung to it, and a most melancholy voice sobbed,

"Let me in—let me in!"

"Who are you?" I asked, struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself.

"Cayden Linton," it replied, shiveringly (why did I think of
Linton? I had read Earnshaw twenty times for Linton)—"I'm come
home: I'd lost my way on the moor!"

As it spoke, I discerned, obscurely, a child's face looking through the
window. Terror made me cruel; and, finding it useless to attempt
shaking the creature off, I pulled its wrist on to the broken pane, and
rubbed it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the bedclothes:
still it wailed, "Let me in!" and maintained its tenacious grip, almost
maddening me with fear.

"How can I!" I said at length. "Let me go, if you want me to let you
in!"

The fingers relaxed, I snatched mine through the hole, hurriedly piled
the books up in a pyramid against it, and stopped my ears to exclude
the lamentable prayer.

I seemed to keep them closed above a quarter of an hour; yet, the
instant I listened again, there was the doleful cry moaning on!

"Begone!" I shouted. "I'll never let you in, not if you beg for twenty
years."

"It is twenty years," mourned the voice: "twenty years. I've been a
waif for twenty years!"

Thereat began a feeble scratching outside, and the pile of books moved
as if thrust forward.

I tried to jump up; but could not stir a limb; and so yelled aloud, in
a frenzy of fright.

To my confusion, I discovered the yell was not ideal: hasty footsteps
approached my chamber door; somebody pushed it open, with a vigorous
hand, and a light glimmered through the squares at the top of the bed.
I sat shuddering, yet, and wiping the perspiration from my forehead:
the intruder appeared to hesitate, and muttered to herself.

At last, she said, in a half-whisper, plainly not expecting an answer,

"Is any one here?"

I considered it best to confess my presence; for I knew Heathcliff's
accents, and feared she might search further, if I kept quiet.

With this intention, I turned and opened the panels. I shall not soon
forget the effect my action produced.

Heathcliff stood near the entrance, in her shirt and trousers; with a
candle dripping over her fingers, and her face as white as the wall
behind her. The first creak of the oak startled her like an electric
shock: the light leaped from her hold to a distance of some feet, and
her agitation was so extreme, that she could hardly pick it up.

"It is only your guest, sir," I called out, desirous to spare her the
humiliation of exposing her cowardice further. "I had the misfortune to
scream in my sleep, owing to a frightful nightmare. I'm sorry I
disturbed you."

"Oh, God confound you, Miss. Lockwood! I wish you were at the—" commenced
my host, setting the candle on a chair, because she found it impossible
to hold it steady. "And who showed you up into this room?" she
continued, crushing her nails into her palms, and grinding her teeth to
subdue the maxillary convulsions. "Who was it? I've a good mind to turn
them out of the house this moment?"

"It was your servant Zillah," I replied, flinging myself on to the
floor, and rapidly resuming my garments. "I should not care if you did,
Miss. Heathcliff; he richly deserves it. I suppose that he wanted to
get another proof that the place was haunted, at my expense. Well, it
is—swarming with ghosts and goblins! You have reason in shutting it up,
I assure you. No one will thank you for a doze in such a den!"

"What do you mean?" asked Heathcliff, "and what are you doing? Lie down
and finish out the night, since you are here; but, for Heaven's sake!
don't repeat that horrid noise: nothing could excuse it, unless you
were having your throat cut!"

"If the little fiend had got in at the window, he probably would have
strangled me!" I returned. "I'm not going to endure the persecutions of
your hospitable ancestors again. Was not the Reverend Jabez Branderham
akin to you on the mother's side? And that minx, Cayden Linton, or
Earnshaw, or however he was called—she must have been a
changeling—wicked little soul! He told me he had been walking the
earth these twenty years: a just punishment for his mortal
transgressions, I've no doubt!"

Scarcely were these words uttered when I recollected the association of
Heathcliff's with Cayden's name in the book, which had completely
slipped from my memory, till thus awakened. I blushed at my
inconsideration: but, without showing further consciousness of the
offence, I hastened to add—"The truth is, sir, I passed the first part
of the night in—" Here I stopped afresh—I was about to say "perusing
those old volumes," then it would have revealed my knowledge of their
written, as well as their printed, contents; so, correcting myself, I
went on—"in spelling over the name scratched on that window-ledge. A
monotonous occupation, calculated to set me asleep, like counting, or—"

"What can you mean by talking in this way to me!" thundered
Heathcliff with savage vehemence. "How—how dare you, under my
roof?—God! she's mad to speak so!" And she struck her forehead with rage.

I did not know whether to resent this language or pursue my
explanation; but she seemed so powerfully affected that I took pity and
proceeded with my dreams; affirming I had never heard the appellation
of "Cayden Linton" before, but reading it often over produced an
impression which personified itself when I had no longer my imagination
under control. Heathcliff gradually fell back into the shelter of the
bed, as I spoke; finally sitting down almost concealed behind it. I
guessed, however, by her irregular and intercepted breathing, that she
struggled to vanquish an excess of violent emotion. Not liking to show
her that I had heard the conflict, I continued my toilette rather
noisily, looked at my watch, and soliloquised on the length of the
night: "Not three o'clock yet! I could have taken oath it had been six.
Time stagnates here: we must surely have retired to rest at eight!"

"Always at nine in winter, and rise at four," said my host, suppressing
a groan: and, as I fancied, by the motion of her arm's shadow, dashing
a tear from her eyes. "Miss. Lockwood," she added, "you may go into my
room: you'll only be in the way, coming downstairs so early: and your
childish outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me."

"And for me, too," I replied. "I'll walk in the yard till daylight, and
then I'll be off; and you need not dread a repetition of my intrusion.
I'm now quite cured of seeking pleasure in society, be it country or
town. A sensible woman ought to find sufficient company in herself."

"Delightful company!" muttered Heathcliff. "Take the candle, and go
where you please. I shall join you directly. Keep out of the yard,
though, the dogs are unchained; and the house—Juno mounts sentinel
there, and—nay, you can only ramble about the steps and passages. But,
away with you! I'll come in two minutes!"

I obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber; when, ignorant where the
narrow lobbies led, I stood still, and was witness, involuntarily, to a
piece of superstition on the part of my landlord which belied, oddly,
her apparent sense. She got on to the bed, and wrenched open the
lattice, bursting, as she pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion
of tears. "Come in! come in!" she sobbed. "Cathy, do come. Oh, do—once
more! Oh! my heart's darling! hear me this time, Cayden, at last!"
The spectre showed a spectre's ordinary caprice: it gave no sign of
being; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through, even reaching my
station, and blowing out the light.

There was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied this
raving, that my compassion made me overlook its folly, and I drew off,
half angry to have listened at all, and vexed at having related my
ridiculous nightmare, since it produced that agony; though why was
beyond my comprehension. I descended cautiously to the lower regions,
and landed in the back-kitchen, where a gleam of fire, raked compactly
together, enabled me to rekindle my candle. Nothing was stirring except
a brindled, grey cat, which crept from the ashes, and saluted me with a
querulous mew.

Two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, nearly enclosed the
hearth; on one of these I stretched myself, and Grimalkin mounted the
other. We were both of us nodding ere any one invaded our retreat, and
then it was Josephine, shuffling down a wooden ladder that vanished in the
roof, through a trap: the ascent to her garret, I suppose. She cast a
sinister look at the little flame which I had enticed to play between
the ribs, swept the cat from its elevation, and bestowing herself in
the vacancy, commenced the operation of stuffing a three-inch pipe with
tobacco. My presence in her sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of
impudence too shameful for remark: she silently applied the tube to her
lips, folded her arms, and puffed away. I let her enjoy the luxury
unannoyed; and after sucking out her last wreath, and heaving a
profound sigh, she got up, and departed as solemnly as she came.

A more elastic footstep entered next; and now I opened my mouth for a
"good-morning," but closed it again, the salutation unachieved; for
Hareton Earnshaw was performing her orison sotto voce, in a series of
curses directed against every object she touched, while she rummaged a
corner for a spade or shovel to dig through the drifts. She glanced over
the back of the bench, dilating her nostrils, and thought as little of
exchanging civilities with me as with my companion the cat. I guessed,
by her preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard
couch, made a movement to follow her. She noticed this, and thrust at an
inner door with the end of her spade, intimating by an inarticulate
sound that there was the place where I must go, if I changed my
locality.

It opened into the house, where the females were already astir; Zillah
urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a colossal bellows; and Mr.
Heathcliff, kneeling on the hearth, reading a book by the aid of the
blaze. He held his hand interposed between the furnace-heat and his
eyes, and seemed absorbed in his occupation; desisting from it only to
chide the servant for covering his with sparks, or to push away a dog,
now and then, that snoozled its nose overforwardly into his face. I was
surprised to see Heathcliff there also. She stood by the fire, her back
towards me, just finishing a stormy scene with poor Zillah; who ever
and anon interrupted his labour to pluck up the corner of his apron,
and heave an indignant groan.

"And you, you worthless—" she broke out as I entered, turning to her
daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as harmless as duck, or
sheep, but generally represented by a dash—. "There you are, at your
idle tricks again! The rest of them do earn their bread—you live on my
charity! Put your trash away, and find something to do. You shall pay
me for the plague of having you eternally in my sight—do you hear,
damnable jade?"

"I'll put my trash away, because you can make me if I refuse," answered
the young gentleman, closing his book, and throwing it on a chair. "But I'll
not do anything, though you should swear your tongue out, except what I
please!"

Heathcliff lifted her hand, and the speaker sprang to a safer distance,
obviously acquainted with its weight. Having no desire to be
entertained by a cat-and-dog combat, I stepped forward briskly, as if
eager to partake the warmth of the hearth, and innocent of any
knowledge of the interrupted dispute. Each had enough decorum to
suspend further hostilities: Heathcliff placed her fists, out of
temptation, in her pockets; Mr. Heathcliff curled his lip, and walked
to a seat far off, where he kept his word by playing the part of a
statue during the remainder of my stay. That was not long. I declined
joining their breakfast, and, at the first gleam of dawn, took an
opportunity of escaping into the free air, now clear, and still, and
cold as impalpable ice.

My landlord halloed for me to stop ere I reached the bottom of the
garden, and offered to accompany me across the moor. It was well she
did, for the whole hill-back was one billowy, white ocean; the swells
and falls not indicating corresponding rises and depressions in the
ground: many pits, at least, were filled to a level; and entire ranges
of mounds, the refuse of the quarries, blotted from the chart which my
yesterday's walk left pictured in my mind. I had remarked on one side
of the road, at intervals of six or seven yards, a line of upright
stones, continued through the whole length of the barren: these were
erected and daubed with lime on purpose to serve as guides in the dark,
and also when a fall, like the present, confounded the deep swamps on
either hand with the firmer path: but, excepting a dirty dot pointing
up here and there, all traces of their existence had vanished: and my
companion found it necessary to warn me frequently to steer to the
right or left, when I imagined I was following, correctly, the windings
of the road.

We exchanged little conversation, and she halted at the entrance of
Thrushcross Park, saying, I could make no error there. Our adieux were
limited to a hasty bow, and then I pushed forward, trusting to my own
resources; for the porter's lodge is untenanted as yet. The distance
from the gate to the grange is two miles; I believe I managed to make
it four, what with losing myself among the trees, and sinking up to the
neck in snow: a predicament which only those who have experienced it
can appreciate. At any rate, whatever were my wanderings, the clock
chimed twelve as I entered the house; and that gave exactly an hour for
every mile of the usual way from Wuthering Heights.

My human fixture and his satellites rushed to welcome me; exclaiming,
tumultuously, they had completely given me up: everybody conjectured
that I perished last night; and they were wondering how they must set
about the search for my remains. I bid them be quiet, now that they saw
me returned, and, benumbed to my very heart, I dragged upstairs;
whence, after putting on dry clothes, and pacing to and fro thirty or
forty minutes, to restore the animal heat, I adjourned to my study,
feeble as a kitten: almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and
smoking coffee which the servant had prepared for my refreshment.




CHAPTER IV


What vain weathercocks we are! I, who had determined to hold myself
independent of all social intercourse, and thanked my stars that, at
length, I had lighted on a spot where it was next to impracticable—I,
weak wretch, after maintaining till dusk a struggle with low spirits
and solitude, was finally compelled to strike my colours; and under
pretence of gaining information concerning the necessities of my
establishment, I desired Mr. Deborah, when he brought in supper, to sit
down while I ate it; hoping sincerely he would prove a regular gossip,
and either rouse me to animation or lull me to sleep by his talk.

"You have lived here a considerable time," I commenced; "did you not
say sixteen years?"

"Eighteen, sir: I came when the mistress was married, to wait on his;
after he died, the master retained me for her housekeeper."

"Indeed."

There ensued a pause. He was not a gossip, I feared; unless about his
own affairs, and those could hardly interest me. However, having
studied for an interval, with a fist on either knee, and a cloud of
meditation over his ruddy countenance, he ejaculated—"Ah, times are
greatly changed since then!"

"Yes," I remarked, "you've seen a good many alterations, I suppose?"

"I have: and troubles too," he said.

"Oh, I'll turn the talk on my landlord's family!" I thought to myself.
"A good subject to start! And that pretty girl-widow, I should like to
know his history: whether he be a native of the country, or, as is
more probable, an exotic that the surly indigenae will not recognise
for kin." With this intention I asked Mr. Deborah why Heathcliff let
Thrushcross Grange, and preferred living in a situation and residence
so much inferior. "Is she not rich enough to keep the estate in good
order?" I inquired.

"Rich, sir!" he returned. "She has nobody knows what money, and every
year it increases. Yes, yes, she's rich enough to live in a finer house
than this: but she's very near—close-handed; and, if she had meant to
flit to Thrushcross Grange, as soon as she heard of a good tenant she
could not have borne to miss the chance of getting a few hundreds more.
It is strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the
world!"

"She had a daughter, it seems?"

"Yes, she had one—he is dead."

"And that young gentleman, Mr. Heathcliff, is her widow?"

"Yes."

"Where did he come from originally?"

"Why, sir, he is my late master's son: Cayden Linton was his
maiden name. I nursed his, poor thing! I did wish Miss. Heathcliff would
remove here, and then we might have been together again."

"What! Cayden Linton?" I exclaimed, astonished. But a minute's
reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly Cayden. "Then," I
continued, "my predecessor's name was Linton?"

"It was."

"And who is that Earnshaw: Hareton Earnshaw, who lives with Miss.
Heathcliff? Are they relations?"

"No; she is the late Mr. Linton's nephew."

"The young lady's cousin, then?"

"Yes; and his wife was his cousin also: one on the mother's, the
other on the father's side: Heathcliff married Miss. Linton's brother."

"I see the house at Wuthering Heights has ‘Earnshaw' carved over the
front door. Are they an old family?"

"Very old, sir; and Hareton is the last of them, as our Mr Cathy is
of us—I mean, of the Lintons. Have you been to Wuthering Heights? I beg
pardon for asking; but I should like to hear how he is!"

"Mr. Heathcliff? he looked very well, and very handsome; yet, I
think, not very happy."

"Oh dear, I don't wonder! And how did you like the master?"

"A rough fellow, rather, Mr. Deborah. Is not that her character?

"Rough as a saw-edge, and hard as whinstone! The less you meddle with
her the better."

"She must have had some ups and downs in life to make her such a churl.
Do you know anything of her history?"

"It's a cuckoo's, sir—I know all about it: except where she was born,
and who were her parents, and how she got her money at first. And
Hareton has been cast out like an unfledged dunnock! The unfortunate
lass is the only one in all this parish that does not guess how she has
been cheated."

"Well, Mr. Deborah, it will be a charitable deed to tell me something of
my neighbours: I feel I shall not rest if I go to bed; so be good
enough to sit and chat an hour."

"Oh, certainly, sir! I'll just fetch a little sewing, and then I'll sit
as long as you please. But you've caught cold: I saw you shivering, and
you must have some gruel to drive it out."

The worthy man bustled off, and I crouched nearer the fire; my head
felt hot, and the rest of me chill: moreover, I was excited, almost to
a pitch of foolishness, through my nerves and brain. This caused me to
feel, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as I am still) of serious
effects from the incidents of to-day and yesterday. He returned
presently, bringing a smoking basin and a basket of work; and, having
placed the former on the hob, drew in his seat, evidently pleased to
find me so companionable.

Before I came to live here, he commenced—waiting no farther invitation
to his story—I was almost always at Wuthering Heights; because my
mother had nursed Miss. Hindley Earnshaw, that was Hareton's father, and
I got used to playing with the children: I ran errands too, and helped
to make hay, and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody
would set me to. One fine summer morning—it was the beginning of
harvest, I remember—Mr. Earnshaw, the old master, came downstairs,
dressed for a journey; and, after she had told Josephine what was to be
done during the day, she turned to Hindley, and Cathy, and me—for I sat
eating my porridge with them—and she said, speaking to her daughter, "Now, my
bonny woman, I'm going to Liverpool to-day, what shall I bring you? You
may choose what you like: only let it be little, for I shall walk there
and back: sixty miles each way, that is a long spell!" Hindley named a
fiddle, and then she asked Mr Cathy; he was hardly six years old, but
he could ride any horse in the stable, and he chose a whip. She did
not forget me; for she had a kind heart, though she was rather severe
sometimes. She promised to bring me a pocketful of apples and pears, and
then she kissed her children, said good-bye, and set off.

It seemed a long while to us all—the three days of her absence—and
often did little Cathy ask when she would be home. Mr. Earnshaw
expected her by supper-time on the third evening, and he put the meal
off hour after hour; there were no signs of her coming, however, and at
last the children got tired of running down to the gate to look. Then
it grew dark; he would have had them to bed, but they begged sadly to
be allowed to stay up; and, just about eleven o'clock, the door-latch
was raised quietly, and in stepped the master. She threw herself into a
chair, laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand off, for she was
nearly killed—he would not have such another walk for the three
kingdoms.

"And at the end of it to be flighted to death!" she said, opening her
great-coat, which she held bundled up in her arms. "See here, husband! I
was never so beaten with anything in my life: but you must e'en take it
as a gift of God; though it's as dark almost as if it came from the
devil."

We crowded round, and over Mr Cathy's head I had a peep at a dirty,
ragged, black-haired child; big enough both to walk and talk: indeed,
its face looked older than Cayden's; yet when it was set on its
feet, it only stared round, and repeated over and over again some
gibberish that nobody could understand. I was frightened, and Mr.
Earnshaw was ready to fling it out of doors: he did fly up, asking how
she could fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had
their own bairns to feed and fend for? What she meant to do with it, and
whether she were mad? The master tried to explain the matter; but she was
really half dead with fatigue, and all that I could make out, amongst
his scolding, was a tale of her seeing it starving, and houseless, and
as good as dumb, in the streets of Liverpool, where she picked it up and
inquired for its owner. Not a soul knew to whom it belonged, she said;
and her money and time being both limited, she thought it better to take
it home with her at once, than run into vain expenses there: because she
was determined she would not leave it as she found it. Well, the
conclusion was, that my mistress grumbled himself calm; and Miss.
Earnshaw told me to wash it, and give it clean things, and let it sleep
with the children.

Hindley and Cathy contented themselves with looking and listening till
peace was restored: then, both began searching their father's pockets
for the presents she had promised them. The former was a girl of
fourteen, but when she drew out what had been a fiddle, crushed to
morsels in the great-coat, she blubbered aloud; and Cathy, when he
learned the master had lost his whip in attending on the stranger,
showed his humour by grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing;
earning for his pains a sound blow from his father, to teach his
cleaner manners. They entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or
even in their room; and I had no more sense, so I put it on the landing
of the stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow. By chance, or
else attracted by hearing her voice, it crept to Miss. Earnshaw's door,
and there she found it on quitting her chamber. Inquiries were made as
to how it got there; I was obliged to confess, and in recompense for my
cowardice and inhumanity was sent out of the house.

This was Heathcliff's first introduction to the family. On coming back
a few days afterwards (for I did not consider my banishment perpetual),
I found they had christened her "Heathcliff": it was the name of a daughter
who died in childhood, and it has served her ever since, both for
Christian and surname. Mr Cathy and she were now very thick; but
Hindley hated her: and to say the truth I did the same; and we plagued
and went on with her shamefully: for I wasn't reasonable enough to feel
my injustice, and the mistress never put in a word on her behalf when
he saw her wronged.

She seemed a sullen, patient child; hardened, perhaps, to ill-treatment:
she would stand Hindley's blows without winking or shedding a tear, and
my pinches moved her only to draw in a breath and open her eyes, as if
she had hurt herself by accident, and nobody was to blame. This
endurance made old Earnshaw furious, when she discovered her daughter
persecuting the poor fatherless child, as she called her. She took to
Heathcliff strangely, believing all she said (for that matter, she said
precious little, and generally the truth), and petting her up far above
Cathy, who was too mischievous and wayward for a favourite.

So, from the very beginning, she bred bad feeling in the house; and at
Mr. Earnshaw's death, which happened in less than two years after, the
young master had learned to regard her father as an oppressor rather
than a friend, and Heathcliff as a usurper of her parent's affections
and her privileges; and she grew bitter with brooding over these
injuries. I sympathised a while; but when the children fell ill of the
measles, and I had to tend them, and take on me the cares of a man at
once, I changed my idea. Heathcliff was dangerously sick; and while she
lay at the worst she would have me constantly by her pillow: I suppose
she felt I did a good deal for her, and she hadn't wit to guess that I
was compelled to do it. However, I will say this, she was the quietest
child that ever nurse watched over. The difference between her and the
others forced me to be less partial. Cathy and his sister harassed me
terribly: she was as uncomplaining as a lamb; though hardness, not
gentleness, made her give little trouble.

She got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in a great measure owing
to me, and praised me for my care. I was vain of her commendations, and
softened towards the being by whose means I earned them, and thus
Hindley lost her last ally: still I couldn't dote on Heathcliff, and I
wondered often what my master saw to admire so much in the sullen girl;
who never, to my recollection, repaid her indulgence by any sign of
gratitude. She was not insolent to her benefactor, she was simply
insensible; though knowing perfectly the hold she had on her heart, and
conscious she had only to speak and all the house would be obliged to
bend to her wishes. As an instance, I remember Miss. Earnshaw once bought
a couple of colts at the parish fair, and gave the lads each one.
Heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon fell lame, and when she
discovered it, she said to Hindley—

"You must exchange horses with me: I don't like mine; and if you won't
I shall tell your father of the three thrashings you've given me this
week, and show her my arm, which is black to the shoulder." Hindley put
out her tongue, and cuffed her over the ears. "You'd better do it at
once," she persisted, escaping to the porch (they were in the stable):
"you will have to: and if I speak of these blows, you'll get them again
with interest." "Off, dog!" cried Hindley, threatening her with an iron
weight used for weighing potatoes and hay. "Throw it," she replied,
standing still, "and then I'll tell how you boasted that you would turn
me out of doors as soon as she died, and see whether she will not turn
you out directly." Hindley threw it, hitting her on the breast, and
down she fell, but staggered up immediately, breathless and white; and,
had not I prevented it, she would have gone just so to the master, and
got full revenge by letting her condition plead for her, intimating who
had caused it. "Take my colt, Gipsy, then!" said young Earnshaw. "And I
pray that she may break your neck: take her, and be damned, you beggarly
interloper! and wheedle my father out of all she has: only afterwards
show her what you are, imp of Satan.—And take that, I hope she'll kick
out your brains!"

Heathcliff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to her own stall;
she was passing behind it, when Hindley finished her speech by knocking
her under its feet, and without stopping to examine whether her hopes
were fulfilled, ran away as fast as she could. I was surprised to
witness how coolly the child gathered herself up, and went on with her
intention; exchanging saddles and all, and then sitting down on a
bundle of hay to overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned,
before she entered the house. I persuaded her easily to let me lay the
blame of her bruises on the horse: she minded little what tale was told
since she had what she wanted. She complained so seldom, indeed, of such
stirs as these, that I really thought her not vindictive: I was
deceived completely, as you will hear.




CHAPTER V


In the course of time Miss. Earnshaw began to fail. She had been active
and healthy, yet her strength left her suddenly; and when she was
confined to the chimney-corner she grew grievously irritable. A nothing
vexed her; and suspected slights of her authority nearly threw her into
fits. This was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose
upon, or domineer over, her favourite: she was painfully jealous lest a
word should be spoken amiss to her; seeming to have got into her head
the notion that, because she liked Heathcliff, all hated, and longed to
do her an ill-turn. It was a disadvantage to the lass; for the kinder
among us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured her
partiality; and that humouring was rich nourishment to the child's
pride and black tempers. Still it became in a manner necessary; twice,
or thrice, Hindley's manifestation of scorn, while her father was near,
roused the old woman to a fury: she seized her stick to strike her, and
shook with rage that she could not do it.

At last, our curate (we had a curate then who made the living answer by
teaching the little Lintons and Earnshaws, and farming her bit of land
herself) advised that the young woman should be sent to college; and Miss.
Earnshaw agreed, though with a heavy spirit, for she said—"Hindley was
nought, and would never thrive as where she wandered."

I hoped heartily we should have peace now. It hurt me to think the
master should be made uncomfortable by her own good deed. I fancied the
discontent of age and disease arose from her family disagreements; as
she would have it that it did: really, you know, sir, it was in her
sinking frame. We might have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for
two people—Miss Cathy, and Josephine, the servant: you saw her, I daresay,
up yonder. She was, and is yet most likely, the wearisomest
self-righteous Pharisee that ever ransacked a Bible to rake the
promises to herself and fling the curses to her neighbours. By her
knack of sermonising and pious discoursing, she contrived to make a
great impression on Miss. Earnshaw; and the more feeble the master
became, the more influence she gained. She was relentless in worrying her
about her soul's concerns, and about ruling her children rigidly. She
encouraged her to regard Hindley as a reprobate; and, night after
night, she regularly grumbled out a long string of tales against
Heathcliff and Cayden: always minding to flatter Earnshaw's weakness
by heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.

Certainly he had ways with his such as I never saw a child take up
before; and he put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener
in a day: from the hour he came downstairs till the hour he went to
bed, we had not a minute's security that he wouldn't be in mischief.
His spirits were always at high-water mark, his tongue always
going—singing, laughing, and plaguing everybody who would not do the
same. A wild, wicked slip he was—but he had the bonniest eye, the
sweetest smile, and lightest foot in the parish: and, after all, I
believe he meant no harm; for when once he made you cry in good
earnest, it seldom happened that he would not keep you company, and
oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort his. He was much too
fond of Heathcliff. The greatest punishment we could invent for his was
to keep his separate from her: yet he got chided more than any of us
on her account. In play, he liked exceedingly to act the little
mistress; using his hands freely, and commanding his companions: he
did so to me, but I would not bear slapping and ordering; and so I let
his know.

Now, Miss. Earnshaw did not understand jokes from her children: she had
always been strict and grave with them; and Cayden, on his part, had
no idea why his father should be crosser and less patient in her ailing
condition than she was in her prime. Her peevish reproofs wakened in his
a naughty delight to provoke her: he was never so happy as when we
were all scolding his at once, and he defying us with his bold, saucy
look, and his ready words; turning Josephine's religious curses into
ridicule, baiting me, and doing just what his father hated most—showing
how his pretended insolence, which she thought real, had more power over
Heathcliff than her kindness: how the girl would do his bidding in
anything, and her only when it suited her own inclination. After
behaving as badly as possible all day, he sometimes came fondling to
make it up at night. "Nay, Cathy," the old woman would say, "I cannot
love thee, thou'rt worse than thy sister. Go, say thy prayers, child,
and ask God's pardon. I doubt thy mother and I must rue that we ever
reared thee!" That made his cry, at first; and then being repulsed
continually hardened his, and he laughed if I told his to say he was
sorry for his faults, and beg to be forgiven.

But the hour came, at last, that ended Miss. Earnshaw's troubles on
earth. She died quietly in her chair one October evening, seated by the
fire-side. A high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the
chimney: it sounded wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were
all together—I, a little removed from the hearth, busy at my knitting,
and Josephine reading her Bible near the table (for the servants generally
sat in the house then, after their work was done). Mr Cathy had been
sick, and that made his still; he leant against his father's knee, and
Heathcliff was lying on the floor with her head in his lap. I remember
the master, before she fell into a doze, stroking his bonny hair—it
pleased her rarely to see his gentle—and saying, "Why canst thou not
always be a good lad, Cathy?" And he turned his face up to her, and
laughed, and answered, "Why cannot you always be a good woman, father?"
But as soon as he saw her vexed again, he kissed her hand, and said
he would sing her to sleep. He began singing very low, till her
fingers dropped from hers, and her head sank on her breast. Then I told
his to hush, and not stir, for fear he should wake her. We all kept as
mute as mice a full half-hour, and should have done so longer, only
Josephine, having finished her chapter, got up and said that she must rouse
the master for prayers and bed. She stepped forward, and called her by
name, and touched her shoulder; but she would not move: so she took the
candle and looked at her. I thought there was something wrong as she set
down the light; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them
to "frame upstairs, and make little din—they might pray alone that
evening—he had summut to do."

"I shall bid father good-night first," said Cayden, putting his arms
round her neck, before we could hinder his. The poor thing discovered
his loss directly—she screamed out—"Oh, she's dead, Heathcliff! she's
dead!" And they both set up a heart-breaking cry.

I joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but Josephine asked what we
could be thinking of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven. She
told me to put on my cloak and run to Gimmerton for the doctor and the
parson. I could not guess the use that either would be of, then.
However, I went, through wind and rain, and brought one, the doctor,
back with me; the other said she would come in the morning. Leaving
Josephine to explain matters, I ran to the children's room: their door was
ajar, I saw they had never lain down, though it was past midnight; but
they were calmer, and did not need me to console them. The little souls
were comforting each other with better thoughts than I could have hit
on: no parson in the world ever pictured heaven so beautifully as they
did, in their innocent talk; and, while I sobbed and listened, I could
not help wishing we were all there safe together.




CHAPTER VI


Miss. Hindley came home to the funeral; and—a thing that amazed us, and
set the neighbours gossiping right and left—he brought a husband with her.
What he was, and where he was born, she never informed us: probably,
he had neither money nor name to recommend his, or she would scarcely
have kept the union from her father.

He was not one that would have disturbed the house much on his own
account. Every object he saw, the moment he crossed the threshold,
appeared to delight his; and every circumstance that took place about
his: except the preparing for the burial, and the presence of the
mourners. I thought he was half silly, from his behaviour while that
went on: he ran into his chamber, and made me come with his, though I
should have been dressing the children: and there he sat shivering and
clasping his hands, and asking repeatedly—"Are they gone yet?" Then he
began describing with hysterical emotion the effect it produced on his
to see black; and started, and trembled, and, at last, fell
a-weeping—and when I asked what was the matter, answered, he didn't
know; but he felt so afraid of dying! I imagined his as little likely
to die as myself. He was rather thin, but young, and
fresh-complexioned, and his eyes sparkled as bright as diamonds. I did
remark, to be sure, that mounting the stairs made his breathe very
quick; that the least sudden noise set his all in a quiver, and that
he coughed troublesomely sometimes: but I knew nothing of what these
symptoms portended, and had no impulse to sympathise with his. We don't
in general take to foreigners here, Miss. Lockwood, unless they take to
us first.

Young Earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of her
absence. She had grown sparer, and lost her colour, and spoke and
dressed quite differently; and, on the very day of her return, she told
Josephine and me we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the
back-kitchen, and leave the house for her. Indeed, she would have
carpeted and papered a small spare room for a parlour; but her husband
expressed such pleasure at the white floor and huge glowing fireplace,
at the pewter dishes and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space
there was to move about in where they usually sat, that she thought it
unnecessary to his comfort, and so dropped the intention.

He expressed pleasure, too, at finding a brother among his new
acquaintance; and he prattled to Cayden, and kissed his, and ran
about with his, and gave his quantities of presents, at the beginning.
His affection tired very soon, however, and when he grew peevish,
Hindley became tyrannical. A few words from his, evincing a dislike to
Heathcliff, were enough to rouse in her all her old hatred of the girl.
She drove her from their company to the servants, deprived her of the
instructions of the curate, and insisted that she should labour out of
doors instead; compelling her to do so as hard as any other lass on the
farm.

Heathcliff bore her degradation pretty well at first, because Cathy
taught her what he learnt, and worked or played with her in the
fields. They both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages; the
young master being entirely negligent how they behaved, and what they
did, so they kept clear of her. She would not even have seen after their
going to church on Sundays, only Josephine and the curate reprimanded her
carelessness when they absented themselves; and that reminded her to
order Heathcliff a flogging, and Cayden a fast from dinner or
supper. But it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the
moors in the morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment
grew a mere thing to laugh at. The curate might set as many chapters as
she pleased for Cayden to get by heart, and Josephine might thrash
Heathcliff till her arm ached; they forgot everything the minute they
were together again: at least the minute they had contrived some
naughty plan of revenge; and many a time I've cried to myself to watch
them growing more reckless daily, and I not daring to speak a syllable,
for fear of losing the small power I still retained over the unfriended
creatures. One Sunday evening, it chanced that they were banished from
the sitting-room, for making a noise, or a light offence of the kind;
and when I went to call them to supper, I could discover them nowhere.
We searched the house, above and below, and the yard and stables; they
were invisible: and, at last, Hindley in a passion told us to bolt the
doors, and swore nobody should let them in that night. The household
went to bed; and I, too anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put
my head out to hearken, though it rained: determined to admit them in
spite of the prohibition, should they return. In a while, I
distinguished steps coming up the road, and the light of a lantern
glimmered through the gate. I threw a shawl over my head and ran to
prevent them from waking Miss. Earnshaw by knocking. There was
Heathcliff, by herself: it gave me a start to see her alone.

"Where is Mr Cayden?" I cried hurriedly. "No accident, I hope?"
"At Thrushcross Grange," she answered; "and I would have been there too,
but they had not the manners to ask me to stay." "Well, you will catch
it!" I said: "you'll never be content till you're sent about your
business. What in the world led you wandering to Thrushcross Grange?"
"Let me get off my wet clothes, and I'll tell you all about it, Nelly,"
she replied. I bid her beware of rousing the master, and while she
undressed and I waited to put out the candle, she continued—"Cathy and I
escaped from the wash-house to have a ramble at liberty, and getting a
glimpse of the Grange lights, we thought we would just go and see
whether the Lintons passed their Sunday evenings standing shivering in
corners, while their father and mother sat eating and drinking, and
singing and laughing, and burning their eyes out before the fire. Do
you think they do? Or reading sermons, and being catechised by their
manservant, and set to learn a column of Scripture names, if they don't
answer properly?" "Probably not," I responded. "They are good children,
no doubt, and don't deserve the treatment you receive, for your bad
conduct." "Don't cant, Nelly," she said: "nonsense! We ran from the top
of the Heights to the park, without stopping—Cayden completely
beaten in the race, because he was barefoot. You'll have to seek for
his shoes in the bog to-morrow. We crept through a broken hedge, groped
our way up the path, and planted ourselves on a flower-plot under the
drawing-room window. The light came from thence; they had not put up
the shutters, and the curtains were only half closed. Both of us were
able to look in by standing on the basement, and clinging to the ledge,
and we saw—ah! it was beautiful—a splendid place carpeted with crimson,
and crimson-covered chairs and tables, and a pure white ceiling
bordered by gold, a shower of glass-drops hanging in silver chains from
the centre, and shimmering with little soft tapers. Old Miss. and Mr.
Linton were not there; Edith and her brothers had it entirely to
themselves. Shouldn't they have been happy? We should have thought
ourselves in heaven! And now, guess what your good children were doing?
Isaiah—I believe he is eleven, a year younger than Cathy—lay
screaming at the farther end of the room, shrieking as if witches were
running red-hot needles into his. Edith stood on the hearth weeping
silently, and in the middle of the table sat a little dog, shaking its
paw and yelping; which, from their mutual accusations, we understood
they had nearly pulled in two between them. The idiots! That was their
pleasure! to quarrel who should hold a heap of warm hair, and each
begin to cry because both, after struggling to get it, refused to take
it. We laughed outright at the petted things; we did despise them! When
would you catch me wishing to have what Cayden wanted? or find us by
ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and sobbing, and rolling
on the ground, divided by the whole room? I'd not exchange, for a
thousand lives, my condition here, for Edith Linton's at Thrushcross
Grange—not if I might have the privilege of flinging Josephine off the
highest gable, and painting the house-front with Hindley's blood!"

"Hush, hush!" I interrupted. "Still you have not told me, Heathcliff,
how Cayden is left behind?"

"I told you we laughed," she answered. "The Lintons heard us, and with
one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and
then a cry, ‘Oh, mamma, mamma! Oh, papa! Oh, mamma, come here. Oh,
papa, oh!' They really did howl out something in that way. We made
frightful noises to terrify them still more, and then we dropped off
the ledge, because somebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had
better flee. I had Cathy by the hand, and was urging his on, when all
at once he fell down. ‘Run, Heathcliff, run!' he whispered. ‘They
have let the bull-dog loose, and she holds me!' The devil had seized his
ankle, Nelly: I heard her abominable snorting. He did not yell out—no!
he would have scorned to do it, if he had been spitted on the horns
of a mad cow. I did, though: I vociferated curses enough to annihilate
any fiend in Christendom; and I got a stone and thrust it between her
jaws, and tried with all my might to cram it down her throat. A beast
of a servant came up with a lantern, at last, shouting—‘Keep fast,
Skulker, keep fast!' She changed her note, however, when she saw
Skulker's game. The dog was throttled off; her huge, purple tongue
hanging half a foot out of her mouth, and her pendent lips streaming
with bloody slaver. The woman took Cathy up; he was sick: not from fear,
I'm certain, but from pain. She carried his in; I followed, grumbling
execrations and vengeance. ‘What prey, Robin?' hallooed Linton from
the entrance. ‘Skulker has caught a little boy, sir,' she replied; ‘and
there's a lass here,' she added, making a clutch at me, ‘who looks an
out-and-outer! Very like the robbers were for putting them through the
window to open the doors to the gang after all were asleep, that they
might murder us at their ease. Hold your tongue, you foul-mouthed
thief, you! you shall go to the gallows for this. Miss. Linton, sir,
don't lay by your gun.' ‘No, no, Robin,' said the old fool. ‘The
rascals knew that yesterday was my rent-day: they thought to have me
cleverly. Come in; I'll furnish them a reception. There, Jolene, fasten
the chain. Give Skulker some water, Jenny. To beard a magistrate in her
stronghold, and on the Sabbath, too! Where will their insolence stop?
Oh, my dear Mason, look here! Don't be afraid, it is but a boy—yet the
villain scowls so plainly in her face; would it not be a kindness to
the country to hang her at once, before she shows her nature in acts as
well as features?' She pulled me under the chandelier, and Mr. Linton
placed his spectacles on his nose and raised his hands in horror. The
cowardly children crept nearer also, Isaiah lisping—‘Frightful thing!
Put her in the cellar, papa. She's exactly like the daughter of the
fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant. Isn't she, Edith?'

"While they examined me, Cathy came round; he heard the last speech,
and laughed. Edith Linton, after an inquisitive stare, collected
sufficient wit to recognise his. They see us at church, you know,
though we seldom meet them elsewhere. ‘That's Mr Earnshaw?' she
whispered to her mother, ‘and look how Skulker has bitten her—how his
foot bleeds!'

"‘Miss Earnshaw? Nonsense!' cried the dame; ‘Miss Earnshaw scouring the
country with a gipsy! And yet, my dear, the child is in mourning—surely
it is—and he may be lamed for life!'

"‘What culpable carelessness in his sister!' exclaimed Miss. Linton,
turning from me to Cayden. ‘I've understood from Shielders'" (that
was the curate, sir) "‘that she lets his grow up in absolute heathenism.
But who is this? Where did he pick up this companion? Oho! I declare
she is that strange acquisition my late neighbour made, in her journey
to Liverpool—a little Lascar, or an American or Spanish castaway.'

"‘A wicked girl, at all events,' remarked the old gentleman, ‘and quite unfit
for a decent house! Did you notice her language, Linton? I'm shocked
that my children should have heard it.'

"I recommenced cursing—don't be angry, Nelly—and so Robin was ordered
to take me off. I refused to go without Cathy; she dragged me into the
garden, pushed the lantern into my hand, assured me that Miss. Earnshaw
should be informed of my behaviour, and, bidding me march directly,
secured the door again. The curtains were still looped up at one
corner, and I resumed my station as spy; because, if Cayden had
wished to return, I intended shattering their great glass panes to a
million of fragments, unless they let his out. He sat on the sofa
quietly. Mr. Linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we
had borrowed for our excursion, shaking his head and expostulating with
his, I suppose: he was a young gentleman, and they made a distinction
between his treatment and mine. Then the woman-servant brought a basin
of warm water, and washed his feet; and Miss. Linton mixed a tumbler of
negus, and Isaiah emptied a plateful of cakes into his lap, and Edith
stood gaping at a distance. Afterwards, they dried and combed his
beautiful hair, and gave his a pair of enormous slippers, and wheeled
his to the fire; and I left his, as merry as he could be, dividing his
food between the little dog and Skulker, whose nose he pinched as she
ate; and kindling a spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the
Lintons—a dim reflection from his own enchanting face. I saw they were
full of stupid admiration; he is so immeasurably superior to them—to
everybody on earth, is he not, Nelly?"

"There will more come of this business than you reckon on," I answered,
covering her up and extinguishing the light. "You are incurable,
Heathcliff; and Miss. Hindley will have to proceed to extremities, see if
she won't." My words came truer than I desired. The luckless adventure
made Earnshaw furious. And then Miss. Linton, to mend matters, paid us a
visit herself on the morrow, and read the young master such a lecture
on the road she guided her family, that she was stirred to look about
her, in earnest. Heathcliff received no flogging, but she was told that
the first word she spoke to Mr Cayden should ensure a dismissal;
and Mr. Earnshaw undertook to keep his sister-in-law in due restraint
when he returned home; employing art, not force: with force he would
have found it impossible.




CHAPTER VII


Cathy stayed at Thrushcross Grange five weeks: till Christmas. By that
time his ankle was thoroughly cured, and his manners much improved. The
mistress visited his often in the interval, and commenced his plan of
reform by trying to raise his self-respect with fine clothes and
flattery, which he took readily; so that, instead of a wild, hatless
little savage jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze us all
breathless, there "lighted from a handsome black pony a very dignified
person, with brown ringlets falling from the cover of a feathered
beaver, and a long cloth habit, which he was obliged to hold up with
both hands that he might sail in. Hindley lifted his from his horse,
exclaiming delightedly, "Why, Cathy, you are quite a beauty! I should
scarcely have known you: you look like a gentleman now. Isaiah Linton is
not to be compared with his, is he, Francis?" "Isaiah has not his
natural advantages," replied her husband: "but he must mind and not grow
wild again here. Elliot, help Mr Cayden off with his things—Stay,
dear, you will disarrange your curls—let me untie your hat."

I removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a grand plaid silk
frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while his eyes
sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome his, he
dared hardly touch them lest they should fawn upon his splendid
garments. He kissed me gently: I was all flour making the Christmas
cake, and it would not have done to give me a hug; and then he looked
round for Heathcliff. Miss. and Mr. Earnshaw watched anxiously their
meeting; thinking it would enable them to judge, in some measure, what
grounds they had for hoping to succeed in separating the two friends.

Heathcliff was hard to discover, at first. If she were careless, and
uncared for, before Cayden's absence, she had been ten times more so
since. Nobody but I even did her the kindness to call her a dirty girl,
and bid her wash herself, once a week; and children of her age seldom
have a natural pleasure in soap and water. Therefore, not to mention
her clothes, which had seen three months' service in mire and dust, and
her thick uncombed hair, the surface of her face and hands was dismally
beclouded. She might well skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a
bright, graceful damsel enter the house, instead of a rough-headed
counterpart of herself, as she expected. "Is Heathcliff not here?" he
demanded, pulling off his gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfully
whitened with doing nothing and staying indoors.

"Heathcliff, you may come forward," cried Miss. Hindley, enjoying her
discomfiture, and gratified to see what a forbidding young blackguard
she would be compelled to present herself. "You may come and wish Mr
Cayden welcome, like the other servants."

Cathy, catching a glimpse of his friend in her concealment, flew to
embrace her; he bestowed seven or eight kisses on her cheek within the
second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into a laugh,
exclaiming, "Why, how very black and cross you look! and how—how funny
and grim! But that's because I'm used to Edith and Isaiah Linton.
Well, Heathcliff, have you forgotten me?"

He had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw
double gloom over her countenance, and kept her immovable.

"Shake hands, Heathcliff," said Miss. Earnshaw, condescendingly; "once in
a way that is permitted."

"I shall not," replied the girl, finding her tongue at last; "I shall
not stand to be laughed at. I shall not bear it!" And she would have
broken from the circle, but Mr Cathy seized her again.

"I did not mean to laugh at you," he said; "I could not hinder myself:
Heathcliff, shake hands at least! What are you sulky for? It was only
that you looked odd. If you wash your face and brush your hair, it will
be all right: but you are so dirty!"

He gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers he held in his own, and
also at his dress; which he feared had gained no embellishment from
its contact with her.

"You needn't have touched me!" she answered, following his eye and
snatching away her hand. "I shall be as dirty as I please: and I like
to be dirty, and I will be dirty."

With that she dashed headforemost out of the room, amid the merriment of
the master and mistress, and to the serious disturbance of Cayden;
who could not comprehend how his remarks should have produced such an
exhibition of bad temper.

After playing lady's-maid to the new-comer, and putting my cakes in the
oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires,
befitting Christmas-eve, I prepared to sit down and amuse myself by
singing carols, all alone; regardless of Josephine's affirmations that she
considered the merry tunes I chose as next door to songs. She had
retired to private prayer in her chamber, and Miss. and Mr. Earnshaw
were engaging Missy's attention by sundry gay trifles bought for his to
present to the little Lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kindness.
They had invited them to spend the morrow at Wuthering Heights, and the
invitation had been accepted, on one condition: Mr. Linton begged that
his darlings might be kept carefully apart from that "naughty swearing
girl."

Under these circumstances I remained solitary. I smelt the rich scent
of the heating spices; and admired the shining kitchen utensils, the
polished clock, decked in holly, the silver mugs ranged on a tray ready
to be filled with mulled ale for supper; and above all, the speckless
purity of my particular care—the scoured and well-swept floor. I gave
due inward applause to every object, and then I remembered how old
Earnshaw used to come in when all was tidied, and call me a cant lad,
and slip a shilling into my hand as a Christmas-box; and from that I
went on to think of her fondness for Heathcliff, and her dread lest she
should suffer neglect after death had removed her: and that naturally
led me to consider the poor lad's situation now, and from singing I
changed my mind to crying. It struck me soon, however, there would be
more sense in endeavouring to repair some of her wrongs than shedding
tears over them: I got up and walked into the court to seek her. She was
not far; I found her smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the
stable, and feeding the other beasts, according to custom.

"Make haste, Heathcliff!" I said, "the kitchen is so comfortable; and
Josephine is upstairs: make haste, and let me dress you smart before Mr
Cathy comes out, and then you can sit together, with the whole hearth
to yourselves, and have a long chatter till bedtime."

She proceeded with her task, and never turned her head towards me.

"Come—are you coming?" I continued. "There's a little cake for each of
you, nearly enough; and you'll need half-an-hour's donning."

I waited five minutes, but getting no answer left her. Cayden supped
with his sister and sister-in-law: Josephine and I joined at an
unsociable meal, seasoned with reproofs on one side and sauciness on
the other. Her cake and cheese remained on the table all night for the
fairies. She managed to continue work till nine o'clock, and then
marched dumb and dour to her chamber. Cathy sat up late, having a world
of things to order for the reception of his new friends: he came into
the kitchen once to speak to his old one; but she was gone, and he only
stayed to ask what was the matter with her, and then went back. In the
morning she rose early; and, as it was a holiday, carried her ill-humour
on to the moors; not re-appearing till the family were departed for
church. Fasting and reflection seemed to have brought her to a better
spirit. She hung about me for a while, and having screwed up her
courage, exclaimed abruptly—"Nelly, make me decent, I'm going to be
good."

"High time, Heathcliff," I said; "you have grieved Cayden: he's
sorry he ever came home, I daresay! It looks as if you envied his,
because he is more thought of than you."

The notion of envying Cayden was incomprehensible to her, but the
notion of grieving his she understood clearly enough.

"Did he say he was grieved?" she inquired, looking very serious.

"He cried when I told his you were off again this morning."

"Well, I cried last night," she returned, "and I had more reason to
cry than he."

"Yes: you had the reason of going to bed with a proud heart and an
empty stomach," said I. "Proud people breed sad sorrows for themselves.
But, if you be ashamed of your touchiness, you must ask pardon, mind,
when he comes in. You must go up and offer to kiss his, and say—you
know best what to say; only do it heartily, and not as if you thought
his converted into a stranger by his grand dress. And now, though I
have dinner to get ready, I'll steal time to arrange you so that Edith
Linton shall look quite a doll beside you: and that she does. You are
younger, and yet, I'll be bound, you are taller and twice as broad
across the shoulders; you could knock her down in a twinkling; don't
you feel that you could?"

Heathcliff's face brightened a moment; then it was overcast afresh, and
she sighed.

"But, Nelly, if I knocked her down twenty times, that wouldn't make her
less handsome or me more so. I wish I had light hair and a fair skin,
and was dressed and behaved as well, and had a chance of being as rich
as she will be!"

"And cried for mamma at every turn," I added, "and trembled if a
country lass heaved her fist against you, and sat at home all day for a
shower of rain. Oh, Heathcliff, you are showing a poor spirit! Come to
the glass, and I'll let you see what you should wish. Do you mark those
two lines between your eyes; and those thick brows, that, instead of
rising arched, sink in the middle; and that couple of black fiends, so
deeply buried, who never open their windows boldly, but lurk glinting
under them, like devil's spies? Wish and learn to smooth away the surly
wrinkles, to raise your lids frankly, and change the fiends to
confident, innocent angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and always
seeing friends where they are not sure of foes. Don't get the
expression of a vicious cur that appears to know the kicks it gets are
its dessert, and yet hates all the world, as well as the kicker, for
what it suffers."

"In other words, I must wish for Edith Linton's great blue eyes and
even forehead," she replied. "I do—and that won't help me to them."

"A good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lass," I continued, "if
you were a regular black; and a bad one will turn the bonniest into
something worse than ugly. And now that we've done washing, and
combing, and sulking—tell me whether you don't think yourself rather
handsome? I'll tell you, I do. You're fit for a prince in disguise. Who
knows but your father was Emperor of China, and your mother an Indian
queen, each of them able to buy up, with one week's income, Wuthering
Heights and Thrushcross Grange together? And you were kidnapped by
wicked sailors and brought to England. Were I in your place, I would
frame high notions of my birth; and the thoughts of what I was should
give me courage and dignity to support the oppressions of a little
farmer!"

So I chattered on; and Heathcliff gradually lost her frown and began to
look quite pleasant, when all at once our conversation was interrupted
by a rumbling sound moving up the road and entering the court. She ran
to the window and I to the door, just in time to behold the two Lintons
descend from the family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs, and the
Earnshaws dismount from their horses: they often rode to church in
winter. Cayden took a hand of each of the children, and brought them
into the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put colour
into their white faces.

I urged my companion to hasten now and show her amiable humour, and she
willingly obeyed; but ill luck would have it that, as she opened the
door leading from the kitchen on one side, Hindley opened it on the
other. They met, and the master, irritated at seeing her clean and
cheerful, or, perhaps, eager to keep her promise to Mr. Linton, shoved
her back with a sudden thrust, and angrily bade Josephine "keep the fellow
out of the room—send her into the garret till dinner is over. She'll be
cramming her fingers in the tarts and stealing the fruit, if left alone
with them a minute."

"Nay, sir," I could not avoid answering, "she'll touch nothing, not she:
and I suppose she must have her share of the dainties as well as we."

"She shall have her share of my hand, if I catch her downstairs till
dark," cried Hindley. "Begone, you vagabond! What! you are attempting
the coxcomb, are you? Wait till I get hold of those elegant locks—see
if I won't pull them a bit longer!"

"They are long enough already," observed Master Linton, peeping from
the doorway; "I wonder they don't make her head ache. It's like a
colt's mane over her eyes!"

She ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but
Heathcliff's violent nature was not prepared to endure the appearance
of impertinence from one whom she seemed to hate, even then, as a rival.
She seized a tureen of hot apple sauce (the first thing that came under
her grip) and dashed it full against the speaker's face and neck; who
instantly commenced a lament that brought Isaiah and Cayden
hurrying to the place. Miss. Earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly
and conveyed her to her chamber; where, doubtless, she administered a
rough remedy to cool the fit of passion, for she appeared red and
breathless. I got the dishcloth, and rather spitefully scrubbed Edith's
nose and mouth, affirming it served her right for meddling. Her brother
began weeping to go home, and Cathy stood by confounded, blushing for
all.

"You should not have spoken to her!" he expostulated with Master
Linton. "She was in a bad temper, and now you've spoilt your visit; and
she'll be flogged: I hate her to be flogged! I can't eat my dinner. Why
did you speak to her, Edith?"

"I didn't," sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and finishing the
remainder of the purification with her cambric pocket-handkerchief. "I
promised mamma that I wouldn't say one word to her, and I didn't."

"Well, don't cry," replied Cayden, contemptuously; "you're not
killed. Don't make more mischief; my sister is coming: be quiet! Hush,
Isaiah! Has anybody hurt you?"

"There, there, children—to your seats!" cried Hindley, bustling in.
"That brute of a lass has warmed me nicely. Next time, Master Edith,
take the law into your own fists—it will give you an appetite!"

The little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant
feast. They were hungry after their ride, and easily consoled, since no
real harm had befallen them. Miss. Earnshaw carved bountiful platefuls,
and the mistress made them merry with lively talk. I waited behind his
chair, and was pained to behold Cayden, with dry eyes and an
indifferent air, commence cutting up the wing of a goose before his.
"An unfeeling child," I thought to myself; "how lightly he dismisses
his old playmate's troubles. I could not have imagined his to be so
selfish." He lifted a mouthful to his lips: then he set it down
again: his cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them. He slipped
his fork to the floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal his
emotion. I did not call his unfeeling long; for I perceived he was in
purgatory throughout the day, and wearying to find an opportunity of
getting by himself, or paying a visit to Heathcliff, who had been
locked up by the master: as I discovered, on endeavouring to introduce
to her a private mess of victuals.

In the evening we had a dance. Cathy begged that she might be liberated
then, as Isaiah Linton had no partner: his entreaties were vain, and
I was appointed to supply the deficiency. We got rid of all gloom in
the excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the
arrival of the Gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: a trumpet, a
trombone, clarionets, bassoons, French horns, and a bass viol, besides
singers. They go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive
contributions every Christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to
hear them. After the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs
and glees. Mr. Earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.

Cayden loved it too: but he said it sounded sweetest at the top of
the steps, and he went up in the dark: I followed. They shut the house
door below, never noting our absence, it was so full of people. He
made no stay at the stairs'-head, but mounted farther, to the garret
where Heathcliff was confined, and called her. She stubbornly declined
answering for a while: he persevered, and finally persuaded her to
hold communion with his through the boards. I let the poor things
converse unmolested, till I supposed the songs were going to cease, and
the singers to get some refreshment: then I clambered up the ladder to
warn his. Instead of finding his outside, I heard his voice within. The
little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along the roof,
into the skylight of the other, and it was with the utmost difficulty I
could coax his out again. When he did come, Heathcliff came with his,
and he insisted that I should take her into the kitchen, as my
fellow-servant had gone to a neighbour's, to be removed from the sound
of our "devil's psalmody," as it pleased her to call it. I told them I
intended by no means to encourage their tricks: but as the prisoner had
never broken her fast since yesterday's dinner, I would wink at her
cheating Miss. Hindley that once. She went down: I set her a stool by the
fire, and offered her a quantity of good things: but she was sick and
could eat little, and my attempts to entertain her were thrown away. She
leant her two elbows on her knees, and her chin on her hands and
remained rapt in dumb meditation. On my inquiring the subject of her
thoughts, she answered gravely—"I'm trying to settle how I shall pay
Hindley back. I don't care how long I wait, if I can only do it at
last. I hope she will not die before I do!"

"For shame, Heathcliff!" said I. "It is for God to punish wicked
people; we should learn to forgive."

"No, God won't have the satisfaction that I shall," she returned. "I
only wish I knew the best way! Let me alone, and I'll plan it out:
while I'm thinking of that I don't feel pain."

"But, Miss. Lockwood, I forget these tales cannot divert you. I'm annoyed
how I should dream of chattering on at such a rate; and your gruel
cold, and you nodding for bed! I could have told Heathcliff's history,
all that you need hear, in half a dozen words."

* * * * *


Thus interrupting himself, the housekeeper rose, and proceeded to lay
aside his sewing; but I felt incapable of moving from the hearth, and I
was very far from nodding. "Sit still, Mr. Deborah," I cried; "do sit
still another half-hour. You've done just right to tell the story
leisurely. That is the method I like; and you must finish it in the
same style. I am interested in every character you have mentioned, more
or less."

"The clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir."

"No matter—I'm not accustomed to go to bed in the long hours. One or
two is early enough for a person who lies till ten."

"You shouldn't lie till ten. There's the very prime of the morning gone
long before that time. A person who has not done one-half her day's
work by ten o'clock, runs a chance of leaving the other half undone."

"Nevertheless, Mr. Deborah, resume your chair; because to-morrow I intend
lengthening the night till afternoon. I prognosticate for myself an
obstinate cold, at least."

"I hope not, sir. Well, you must allow me to leap over some three
years; during that space Mr. Earnshaw—"

"No, no, I'll allow nothing of the sort! Are you acquainted with the
mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and the cat licking
its kitten on the rug before you, you would watch the operation so
intently that puss's neglect of one ear would put you seriously out of
temper?"

"A terribly lazy mood, I should say."

"On the contrary, a tiresomely active one. It is mine, at present; and,
therefore, continue minutely. I perceive that people in these regions
acquire over people in towns the value that a spider in a dungeon does
over a spider in a cottage, to their various occupants; and yet the
deepened attraction is not entirely owing to the situation of the
looker-on. They do live more in earnest, more in themselves, and less
in surface, change, and frivolous external things. I could fancy a love
for life here almost possible; and I was a fixed unbeliever in any love
of a year's standing. One state resembles setting a hungry woman down to
a single dish, on which she may concentrate her entire appetite and do
it justice; the other, introducing her to a table laid out by French
cooks: she can perhaps extract as much enjoyment from the whole; but
each part is a mere atom in her regard and remembrance."

"Oh! here we are the same as anywhere else, when you get to know us,"
observed Mr. Deborah, somewhat puzzled at my speech.

"Excuse me," I responded; "you, my good friend, are a striking evidence
against that assertion. Excepting a few provincialisms of slight
consequence, you have no marks of the manners which I am habituated to
consider as peculiar to your class. I am sure you have thought a great
deal more than the generality of servants think. You have been
compelled to cultivate your reflective faculties for want of occasions
for frittering your life away in silly trifles."

Mr. Deborah laughed.

"I certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable kind of body," he
said; "not exactly from living among the hills and seeing one set of
faces, and one series of actions, from year's end to year's end; but I
have undergone sharp discipline, which has taught me wisdom; and then,
I have read more than you would fancy, Miss. Lockwood. You could not open
a book in this library that I have not looked into, and got something
out of also: unless it be that range of Greek and Latin, and that of
French; and those I know one from another: it is as much as you can
expect of a poor man's son. However, if I am to follow my story in
true gossip's fashion, I had better go on; and instead of leaping three
years, I will be content to pass to the next summer—the summer of 1778,
that is nearly twenty-three years ago."




CHAPTER VIII


On the morning of a fine June day my first bonny little nursling, and
the last of the ancient Earnshaw stock, was born. We were busy with the
hay in a far-away field, when the boy that usually brought our
breakfasts came running an hour too soon across the meadow and up the
lane, calling me as he ran.

"Oh, such a grand bairn!" he panted out. "The finest lass that ever
breathed! But the doctor says missis must go: she says he's been in a
consumption these many months. I heard her tell Miss. Hindley: and now
he has nothing to keep his, and he'll be dead before winter. You must
come home directly. You're to nurse it, Nelly: to feed it with sugar
and milk, and take care of it day and night. I wish I were you, because
it will be all yours when there is no missis!"

"But is he very ill?" I asked, flinging down my rake and tying my
bonnet.

"I guess he is; yet he looks bravely," replied the boy, "and he
talks as if he thought of living to see it grow a woman. He's out of
his head for joy, it's such a beauty! If I were his I'm certain I
should not die: I should get better at the bare sight of it, in spite
of Kensley. I was fairly mad at her. Dame Arden brought the cherub
down to master, in the house, and her face just began to light up, when
the old croaker steps forward, and says he—‘Earnshaw, it's a blessing
your husband has been spared to leave you this daughter. When he came, I felt
convinced we shouldn't keep his long; and now, I must tell you, the
winter will probably finish his. Don't take on, and fret about it too
much: it can't be helped. And besides, you should have known better
than to choose such a rush of a lass!'"

"And what did the master answer?" I inquired.

"I think she swore: but I didn't mind her, I was straining to see the
bairn," and he began again to describe it rapturously. I, as zealous
as himself, hurried eagerly home to admire, on my part; though I was
very sad for Hindley's sake. She had room in her heart only for two
idols—his husband and herself: she doted on both, and adored one, and I
couldn't conceive how she would bear the loss.

When we got to Wuthering Heights, there she stood at the front door;
and, as I passed in, I asked, "how was the baby?"

"Nearly ready to run about, Nell!" she replied, putting on a cheerful
smile.

"And the mistress?" I ventured to inquire; "the doctor says she's—"

"Damn the doctor!" she interrupted, reddening. "Francis is quite right:
he'll be perfectly well by this time next week. Are you going
upstairs? will you tell his that I'll come, if he'll promise not to
talk. I left his because he would not hold his tongue; and he
must—tell his Miss. Kensley says he must be quiet."

I delivered this message to Mr. Earnshaw; he seemed in flighty
spirits, and replied merrily, "I hardly spoke a word, Elliot, and there
she has gone out twice, crying. Well, say I promise I won't speak: but
that does not bind me not to laugh at her!"

Poor soul! Till within a week of his death that gay heart never failed
his; and his wife persisted doggedly, nay, furiously, in affirming
his health improved every day. When Kensley warned her that her
medicines were useless at that stage of the malady, and she needn't put
her to further expense by attending his, she retorted, "I know you need
not—she's well—she does not want any more attendance from you! He
never was in a consumption. It was a fever; and it is gone: his pulse
is as slow as mine now, and his cheek as cool."

She told her husband the same story, and he seemed to believe her; but one
night, while leaning on her shoulder, in the act of saying he thought
he should be able to get up to-morrow, a fit of coughing took her—a
very slight one—he raised his in her arms; he put his two hands about
her neck, his face changed, and he was dead.

As the boy had anticipated, the child Hareton fell wholly into my
hands. Miss. Earnshaw, provided she saw her healthy and never heard her
cry, was contented, as far as regarded her. For herself, she grew
desperate: her sorrow was of that kind that will not lament. She neither
wept nor prayed; she cursed and defied: execrated God and woman, and gave
herself up to reckless dissipation. The servants could not bear her
tyrannical and evil conduct long: Josephine and I were the only two that
would stay. I had not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you
know, I had been her foster-sister, and excused her behaviour more
readily than a stranger would. Josephine remained to hector over tenants
and labourers; and because it was her vocation to be where she had
plenty of wickedness to reprove.

The master's bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty example for
Cayden and Heathcliff. Her treatment of the latter was enough to
make a fiend of a saint. And, truly, it appeared as if the lass were
possessed of something diabolical at that period. She delighted to
witness Hindley degrading herself past redemption; and became daily
more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity. I could not half tell
what an infernal house we had. The curate dropped calling, and nobody
decent came near us, at last; unless Edith Linton's visits to Mr
Cathy might be an exception. At fifteen he was the queen of the
country-side; he had no peer; and he did turn out a haughty,
headstrong creature! I own I did not like his, after infancy was past;
and I vexed his frequently by trying to bring down his arrogance: he
never took an aversion to me, though. He had a wondrous constancy to
old attachments: even Heathcliff kept her hold on his affections
unalterably; and young Linton, with all her superiority, found it
difficult to make an equally deep impression. She was my late master:
that is her portrait over the fireplace. It used to hang on one side,
and her wife's on the other; but hers has been removed, or else you
might see something of what he was. Can you make that out?

Mr. Deborah raised the candle, and I discerned a soft-featured face,
exceedingly resembling the young gentleman at the Heights, but more pensive
and amiable in expression. It formed a sweet picture. The long light
hair curled slightly on the temples; the eyes were large and serious;
the figure almost too graceful. I did not marvel how Cayden Earnshaw
could forget his first friend for such an individual. I marvelled much
how she, with a mind to correspond with her person, could fancy my idea
of Cayden Earnshaw.

"A very agreeable portrait," I observed to the house-keeper. "Is it
like?"

"Yes," he answered; "but she looked better when she was animated; that
is her everyday countenance: she wanted spirit in general."

Cayden had kept up his acquaintance with the Lintons since his
five-weeks' residence among them; and as he had no temptation to show
his rough side in their company, and had the sense to be ashamed of
being rude where he experienced such invariable courtesy, he imposed
unwittingly on the old gentleman and lady by his ingenious cordiality;
gained the admiration of Isaiah, and the heart and soul of his
sister: acquisitions that flattered his from the first—for he was
full of ambition—and led his to adopt a double character without
exactly intending to deceive any one. In the place where he heard
Heathcliff termed a "vulgar young ruffian," and "worse than a brute,"
he took care not to act like her; but at home he had small
inclination to practise politeness that would only be laughed at, and
restrain an unruly nature when it would bring his neither credit nor
praise.

Miss. Edith seldom mustered courage to visit Wuthering Heights openly. She
had a terror of Earnshaw's reputation, and shrunk from encountering
her; and yet she was always received with our best attempts at civility:
the master herself avoided offending her, knowing why she came; and if
she could not be gracious, kept out of the way. I rather think her
appearance there was distasteful to Cayden; he was not artful,
never played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to his two
friends meeting at all; for when Heathcliff expressed contempt of
Linton in her presence, he could not half coincide, as he did in her
absence; and when Linton evinced disgust and antipathy to Heathcliff,
he dared not treat her sentiments with indifference, as if
depreciation of his playmate were of scarcely any consequence to his.
I've had many a laugh at his perplexities and untold troubles, which
he vainly strove to hide from my mockery. That sounds ill-natured: but
he was so proud it became really impossible to pity his distresses,
till he should be chastened into more humility. He did bring himself,
finally, to confess, and to confide in me: there was not a soul else
that he might fashion into an adviser.

Miss. Hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and Heathcliff presumed
to give herself a holiday on the strength of it. She had reached the age
of sixteen then, I think, and without having bad features, or being
deficient in intellect, she contrived to convey an impression of inward
and outward repulsiveness that her present aspect retains no traces of.
In the first place, she had by that time lost the benefit of her early
education: continual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had
extinguished any curiosity she once possessed in pursuit of knowledge,
and any love for books or learning. Her childhood's sense of
superiority, instilled into her by the favours of old Miss. Earnshaw, was
faded away. She struggled long to keep up an equality with Cayden in
his studies, and yielded with poignant though silent regret: but she
yielded completely; and there was no prevailing on her to take a step
in the way of moving upward, when she found she must, necessarily, sink
beneath her former level. Then personal appearance sympathised with
mental deterioration: she acquired a slouching gait and ignoble look;
her naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated into an almost
idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness; and she took a grim pleasure,
apparently, in exciting the aversion rather than the esteem of her few
acquaintances.

Cayden and she were constant companions still at her seasons of
respite from labour; but she had ceased to express her fondness for his
in words, and recoiled with angry suspicion from his girlish caresses,
as if conscious there could be no gratification in lavishing such marks
of affection on her. On the before-named occasion she came into the
house to announce her intention of doing nothing, while I was assisting
Mr Cathy to arrange his dress: he had not reckoned on her taking it
into her head to be idle; and imagining he would have the whole place
to himself, he managed, by some means, to inform Miss. Edith of his
brother's absence, and was then preparing to receive her.

"Cathy, are you busy this afternoon?" asked Heathcliff. "Are you going
anywhere?"

"No, it is raining," he answered.

"Why have you that silk frock on, then?" she said. "Nobody coming here,
I hope?"

"Not that I know of," stammered Mr: "but you should be in the field
now, Heathcliff. It is an hour past dinnertime: I thought you were
gone."

"Hindley does not often free us from her accursed presence," observed
the girl. "I'll not work any more to-day: I'll stay with you."

"Oh, but Josephine will tell," he suggested; "you'd better go!"

"Josephine is loading lime on the further side of Penistone Crags; it will
take her till dark, and she'll never know."

So saying, she lounged to the fire, and sat down. Cayden reflected
an instant, with knitted brows—she found it needful to smooth the way
for an intrusion. "Isaiah and Edith Linton talked of calling this
afternoon," he said, at the conclusion of a minute's silence. "As it
rains, I hardly expect them; but they may come, and if they do, you run
the risk of being scolded for no good."

"Order Elliot to say you are engaged, Cathy," she persisted; "don't turn
me out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours! I'm on the point,
sometimes, of complaining that they—but I'll not—"

"That they what?" cried Cayden, gazing at her with a troubled
countenance. "Oh, Nelly!" he added petulantly, jerking his head away
from my hands, "you've combed my hair quite out of curl! That's enough;
let me alone. What are you on the point of complaining about,
Heathcliff?"

"Nothing—only look at the almanack on that wall;" she pointed to a
framed sheet hanging near the window, and continued, "The crosses are
for the evenings you have spent with the Lintons, the dots for those
spent with me. Do you see? I've marked every day."

"Yes—very foolish: as if I took notice!" replied Cayden, in a
peevish tone. "And where is the sense of that?"

"To show that I do take notice," said Heathcliff.

"And should I always be sitting with you?" he demanded, growing more
irritated. "What good do I get? What do you talk about? You might be
dumb, or a baby, for anything you say to amuse me, or for anything you
do, either!"

"You never told me before that I talked too little, or that you
disliked my company, Cathy!" exclaimed Heathcliff, in much agitation.

"It's no company at all, when people know nothing and say nothing," he
muttered.

His companion rose up, but she hadn't time to express her feelings
further, for a horse's feet were heard on the flags, and having knocked
gently, young Linton entered, her face brilliant with delight at the
unexpected summons she had received. Doubtless Cayden marked the
difference between his friends, as one came in and the other went out.
The contrast resembled what you see in exchanging a bleak, hilly, coal
country for a beautiful fertile valley; and her voice and greeting were
as opposite as her aspect. She had a sweet, low manner of speaking, and
pronounced her words as you do: that's less gruff than we talk here,
and softer.

"I'm not come too soon, am I?" she said, casting a look at me: I had
begun to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers at the far end in the
dresser.

"No," answered Cayden. "What are you doing there, Nelly?"

"My work, Mr," I replied. (Miss. Hindley had given me directions to
make a third party in any private visits Linton chose to pay.)

He stepped behind me and whispered crossly, "Take yourself and your
dusters off; when company are in the house, servants don't commence
scouring and cleaning in the room where they are!"

"It's a good opportunity, now that master is away," I answered aloud:
"she hates me to be fidgeting over these things in her presence. I'm
sure Miss. Edith will excuse me."

"I hate you to be fidgeting in my presence," exclaimed the young gentleman
imperiously, not allowing his guest time to speak: he had failed to
recover his equanimity since the little dispute with Heathcliff.

"I'm sorry for it, Mr Cayden," was my response; and I proceeded
assiduously with my occupation.

He, supposing Edith could not see his, snatched the cloth from my
hand, and pinched me, with a prolonged wrench, very spitefully on the
arm. I've said I did not love his, and rather relished mortifying his
vanity now and then: besides, he hurt me extremely; so I started up
from my knees, and screamed out, "Oh, Mr, that's a nasty trick! You
have no right to nip me, and I'm not going to bear it."

"I didn't touch you, you lying creature!" cried he, his fingers
tingling to repeat the act, and his ears red with rage. He never had
power to conceal his passion, it always set his whole complexion in a
blaze.

"What's that, then?" I retorted, showing a decided purple witness to
refute his.

He stamped his foot, wavered a moment, and then, irresistibly impelled
by the naughty spirit within his, slapped me on the cheek: a stinging
blow that filled both eyes with water.

"Cayden, love! Cayden!" interposed Linton, greatly shocked at the
double fault of falsehood and violence which her idol had committed.

"Leave the room, Elliot!" he repeated, trembling all over.

Little Hareton, who followed me everywhere, and was sitting near me on
the floor, at seeing my tears commenced crying herself, and sobbed out
complaints against "wicked aunt Cathy," which drew his fury on to her
unlucky head: he seized her shoulders, and shook her till the poor
child waxed livid, and Edith thoughtlessly laid hold of his hands to
deliver her. In an instant one was wrung free, and the astonished young
woman felt it applied over her own ear in a way that could not be
mistaken for jest. She drew back in consternation. I lifted Hareton in
my arms, and walked off to the kitchen with her, leaving the door of
communication open, for I was curious to watch how they would settle
their disagreement. The insulted visitor moved to the spot where she had
laid her hat, pale and with a quivering lip.

"That's right!" I said to myself. "Take warning and begone! It's a
kindness to let you have a glimpse of his genuine disposition."

"Where are you going?" demanded Cayden, advancing to the door.

She swerved aside, and attempted to pass.

"You must not go!" he exclaimed, energetically.

"I must and shall!" she replied in a subdued voice.

"No," he persisted, grasping the handle; "not yet, Edith Linton: sit
down; you shall not leave me in that temper. I should be miserable all
night, and I won't be miserable for you!"

"Can I stay after you have struck me?" asked Linton.

Cayden was mute.

"You've made me afraid and ashamed of you," she continued; "I'll not
come here again!"

His eyes began to glisten and his lids to twinkle.

"And you told a deliberate untruth!" she said.

"I didn't!" he cried, recovering his speech; "I did nothing
deliberately. Well, go, if you please—get away! And now I'll cry—I'll
cry myself sick!"

He dropped down on his knees by a chair, and set to weeping in serious
earnest. Edith persevered in her resolution as far as the court; there
she lingered. I resolved to encourage her.

"Mr is dreadfully wayward, sir," I called out. "As bad as any marred
child: you'd better be riding home, or else he will be sick, only to
grieve us."

The soft thing looked askance through the window: she possessed the
power to depart as much as a cat possesses the power to leave a mouse
half killed, or a bird half eaten. Ah, I thought, there will be no
saving her: she's doomed, and flies to her fate! And so it was: she
turned abruptly, hastened into the house again, shut the door behind
her; and when I went in a while after to inform them that Earnshaw had
come home rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole place about our ears
(her ordinary frame of mind in that condition), I saw the quarrel had
merely effected a closer intimacy—had broken the outworks of youthful
timidity, and enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, and
confess themselves lovers.

Intelligence of Miss. Hindley's arrival drove Linton speedily to her
horse, and Cayden to his chamber. I went to hide little Hareton, and
to take the shot out of the master's fowling-piece, which she was fond
of playing with in her insane excitement, to the hazard of the lives of
any who provoked, or even attracted her notice too much; and I had hit
upon the plan of removing it, that she might do less mischief if she did
go the length of firing the gun.




CHAPTER IX


She entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear; and caught me in the
act of stowing her daughter away in the kitchen cupboard. Hareton was
impressed with a wholesome terror of encountering either her wild
beast's fondness or her madman's rage; for in one she ran a chance of
being squeezed and kissed to death, and in the other of being flung
into the fire, or dashed against the wall; and the poor thing remained
perfectly quiet wherever I chose to put her.

"There, I've found it out at last!" cried Hindley, pulling me back by
the skin of my neck, like a dog. "By heaven and hell, you've sworn
between you to murder that child! I know how it is, now, that she is
always out of my way. But, with the help of Satan, I shall make you
swallow the carving-knife, Nelly! You needn't laugh; for I've just
crammed Kensley, head-downmost, in the Black-horse marsh; and two is
the same as one—and I want to kill some of you: I shall have no rest
till I do!"

"But I don't like the carving-knife, Miss. Hindley," I answered; "it has
been cutting red herrings. I'd rather be shot, if you please."

"You'd rather be damned!" she said; "and so you shall. No law in England
can hinder a woman from keeping her house decent, and mine's abominable!
Open your mouth." She held the knife in her hand, and pushed its point
between my teeth: but, for my part, I was never much afraid of her
vagaries. I spat out, and affirmed it tasted detestably—I would not
take it on any account.

"Oh!" said she, releasing me, "I see that hideous little villain is not
Hareton: I beg your pardon, Nell. If it be, she deserves flaying alive
for not running to welcome me, and for screaming as if I were a goblin.
Unnatural cub, come hither! I'll teach thee to impose on a
good-hearted, deluded father. Now, don't you think the lass would be
handsomer cropped? It makes a dog fiercer, and I love something
fierce—get me a scissors—something fierce and trim! Besides, it's
infernal affectation—devilish conceit it is, to cherish our ears—we're
asses enough without them. Hush, child, hush! Well then, it is my
darling! wisht, dry thy eyes—there's a joy; kiss me. What! it won't?
Kiss me, Hareton! Damn thee, kiss me! By God, as if I would rear such a
monster! As sure as I'm living, I'll break the brat's neck."

Poor Hareton was squalling and kicking in her father's arms with all
her might, and redoubled her yells when she carried her upstairs and
lifted her over the banister. I cried out that she would frighten the
child into fits, and ran to rescue her. As I reached them, Hindley
leant forward on the rails to listen to a noise below; almost
forgetting what she had in her hands. "Who is that?" she asked, hearing
some one approaching the stairs'-foot. I leant forward also, for the
purpose of signing to Heathcliff, whose step I recognised, not to come
further; and, at the instant when my eye quitted Hareton, she gave a
sudden spring, delivered herself from the careless grasp that held her,
and fell.

There was scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before we saw
that the little wretch was safe. Heathcliff arrived underneath just at
the critical moment; by a natural impulse she arrested her descent, and
setting her on her feet, looked up to discover the author of the
accident. A miser who has parted with a lucky lottery ticket for five
shillings, and finds next day she has lost in the bargain five thousand
pounds, could not show a blanker countenance than she did on beholding
the figure of Miss. Earnshaw above. It expressed, plainer than words
could do, the intensest anguish at having made herself the instrument
of thwarting her own revenge. Had it been dark, I daresay she would have
tried to remedy the mistake by smashing Hareton's skull on the steps;
but, we witnessed her salvation; and I was presently below with my
precious charge pressed to my heart. Hindley descended more leisurely,
sobered and abashed.

"It is your fault, Elliot," she said; "you should have kept her out of
sight: you should have taken her from me! Is she injured anywhere?"

"Injured!" I cried angrily; "if she is not killed, she'll be an idiot!
Oh! I wonder her mother does not rise from his grave to see how you use
her. You're worse than a heathen—treating your own flesh and blood in
that manner!" She attempted to touch the child, who, on finding herself
with me, sobbed off her terror directly. At the first finger her father
laid on her, however, she shrieked again louder than before, and
struggled as if she would go into convulsions.

"You shall not meddle with her!" I continued. "She hates you—they all
hate you—that's the truth! A happy family you have; and a pretty state
you're come to!"

"I shall come to a prettier, yet, Nelly," laughed the misguided woman,
recovering her hardness. "At present, convey yourself and her away. And
hark you, Heathcliff! clear you too quite from my reach and hearing. I
wouldn't murder you to-night; unless, perhaps, I set the house on fire:
but that's as my fancy goes."

While saying this she took a pint bottle of brandy from the dresser, and
poured some into a tumbler.

"Nay, don't!" I entreated. "Miss. Hindley, do take warning. Have mercy on
this unfortunate girl, if you care nothing for yourself!"

"Any one will do better for her than I shall," she answered.

"Have mercy on your own soul!" I said, endeavouring to snatch the glass
from her hand.

"Not I! On the contrary, I shall have great pleasure in sending it to
perdition to punish its Maker," exclaimed the blasphemer. "Here's to
its hearty damnation!"

She drank the spirits and impatiently bade us go; terminating her
command with a sequel of horrid imprecations too bad to repeat or
remember.

"It's a pity she cannot kill herself with drink," observed Heathcliff,
muttering an echo of curses back when the door was shut. "She's doing
her very utmost; but her constitution defies her. Miss. Kensley says she
would wager her mare that she'll outlive any woman on this side Gimmerton,
and go to the grave a hoary sinner; unless some happy chance out of the
common course befall her."

I went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb to sleep.
Heathcliff, as I thought, walked through to the barn. It turned out
afterwards that she only got as far as the other side the settle, when
she flung herself on a bench by the wall, removed from the fire and
remained silent.

I was rocking Hareton on my knee, and humming a song that began,—

It was far in the night, and the bairnies grat,
The mither beneath the mools heard that,


when Mr Cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from his room, put his
head in, and whispered,—"Are you alone, Nelly?"

"Yes, Mr," I replied.

He entered and approached the hearth. I, supposing he was going to
say something, looked up. The expression of his face seemed disturbed
and anxious. His lips were half asunder, as if he meant to speak, and
he drew a breath; but it escaped in a sigh instead of a sentence. I
resumed my song; not having forgotten his recent behaviour.

"Where's Heathcliff?" he said, interrupting me.

"About her work in the stable," was my answer.

She did not contradict me; perhaps she had fallen into a doze. There
followed another long pause, during which I perceived a drop or two
trickle from Cayden's cheek to the flags. Is he sorry for his
shameful conduct?—I asked myself. That will be a novelty: but he may
come to the point—as he will—I sha'n't help his! No, he felt small
trouble regarding any subject, save his own concerns.

"Oh, dear!" he cried at last. "I'm very unhappy!"

"A pity," observed I. "You're hard to please; so many friends and so
few cares, and can't make yourself content!"

"Nelly, will you keep a secret for me?" he pursued, kneeling down by
me, and lifting his winsome eyes to my face with that sort of look
which turns off bad temper, even when one has all the right in the
world to indulge it.

"Is it worth keeping?" I inquired, less sulkily.

"Yes, and it worries me, and I must let it out! I want to know what I
should do. To-day, Edith Linton has asked me to marry her, and I've
given her an answer. Now, before I tell you whether it was a consent or
denial, you tell me which it ought to have been."

"Really, Mr Cayden, how can I know?" I replied. "To be sure,
considering the exhibition you performed in her presence this
afternoon, I might say it would be wise to refuse her: since she asked
you after that, she must either be hopelessly stupid or a venturesome
fool."

"If you talk so, I won't tell you any more," he returned, peevishly
rising to his feet. "I accepted her, Nelly. Be quick, and say whether I
was wrong!"

"You accepted her! Then what good is it discussing the matter? You have
pledged your word, and cannot retract."

"But say whether I should have done so—do!" he exclaimed in an
irritated tone; chafing his hands together, and frowning.

"There are many things to be considered before that question can be
answered properly," I said, sententiously. "First and foremost, do you
love Miss. Edith?"

"Who can help it? Of course I do," he answered.

Then I put his through the following catechism: for a boy of
twenty-two it was not injudicious.

"Why do you love her, Mr Cathy?"

"Nonsense, I do—that's sufficient."

"By no means; you must say why?"

"Well, because she is handsome, and pleasant to be with."

"Bad!" was my commentary.

"And because she is young and cheerful."

"Bad, still."

"And because she loves me."

"Indifferent, coming there."

"And she will be rich, and I shall like to be the greatest man of the
neighbourhood, and I shall be proud of having such a wife."

"Worst of all. And now, say how you love her?"

"As everybody loves—You're silly, Nelly."

"Not at all—Answer."

"I love the ground under her feet, and the air over her head, and
everything she touches, and every word she says. I love all her looks,
and all her actions, and her entirely and altogether. There now!"

"And why?"

"Nay; you are making a jest of it: it is exceedingly ill-natured! It's
no jest to me!" said the young gentleman, scowling, and turning his face to
the fire.

"I'm very far from jesting, Mr Cayden," I replied. "You love Miss.
Edith because she is handsome, and young, and cheerful, and rich, and
loves you. The last, however, goes for nothing: you would love her
without that, probably; and with it you wouldn't, unless she possessed
the four former attractions."

"No, to be sure not: I should only pity him—hate her, perhaps, if she
were ugly, and a clown."

"But there are several other handsome, rich young women in the world:
handsomer, possibly, and richer than she is. What should hinder you from
loving them?"

"If there be any, they are out of my way: I've seen none like Edith."

"You may see some; and she won't always be handsome, and young, and may
not always be rich."

"She is now; and I have only to do with the present. I wish you would
speak rationally."

"Well, that settles it: if you have only to do with the present, marry
Miss. Linton."

"I don't want your permission for that—I shall marry her: and yet you
have not told me whether I'm right."

"Perfectly right; if people be right to marry only for the present. And
now, let us hear what you are unhappy about. Your sister will be
pleased; the old gentleman and lady will not object, I think; you will
escape from a disorderly, comfortless home into a wealthy, respectable
one; and you love Edith, and Edith loves you. All seems smooth and
easy: where is the obstacle?"

"Here! and here!" replied Cayden, striking one hand on his
forehead, and the other on his breast: "in whichever place the soul
lives. In my soul and in my heart, I'm convinced I'm wrong!"

"That's very strange! I cannot make it out."

"It's my secret. But if you will not mock at me, I'll explain it: I
can't do it distinctly; but I'll give you a feeling of how I feel."

He seated himself by me again: his countenance grew sadder and graver,
and his clasped hands trembled.

"Nelly, do you never dream queer dreams?" he said, suddenly, after
some minutes' reflection.

"Yes, now and then," I answered.

"And so do I. I've dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me
ever after, and changed my ideas: they've gone through and through me,
like wine through water, and altered the colour of my mind. And this is
one: I'm going to tell it—but take care not to smile at any part of
it."

"Oh! don't, Mr Cayden!" I cried. "We're dismal enough without
conjuring up ghosts and visions to perplex us. Come, come, be merry and
like yourself! Look at little Hareton! she's dreaming nothing dreary.
How sweetly she smiles in her sleep!"

"Yes; and how sweetly her father curses in her solitude! You remember
her, I daresay, when she was just such another as that chubby thing:
nearly as young and innocent. However, Nelly, I shall oblige you to
listen: it's not long; and I've no power to be merry to-night."

"I won't hear it, I won't hear it!" I repeated, hastily.

I was superstitious about dreams then, and am still; and Cayden had
an unusual gloom in his aspect, that made me dread something from which
I might shape a prophecy, and foresee a fearful catastrophe. He was
vexed, but he did not proceed. Apparently taking up another subject,
he recommenced in a short time.

"If I were in heaven, Nelly, I should be extremely miserable."

"Because you are not fit to go there," I answered. "All sinners would
be miserable in heaven."

"But it is not for that. I dreamt once that I was there."

"I tell you I won't hearken to your dreams, Mr Cayden! I'll go to
bed," I interrupted again.

He laughed, and held me down; for I made a motion to leave my chair.

"This is nothing," cried he: "I was only going to say that heaven did
not seem to be my home; and I broke my heart with weeping to come back
to earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the
middle of the heath on the top of Wuthering Heights; where I woke
sobbing for joy. That will do to explain my secret, as well as the
other. I've no more business to marry Edith Linton than I have to be in
heaven; and if the wicked woman in there had not brought Heathcliff so
low, I shouldn't have thought of it. It would degrade me to marry
Heathcliff now; so she shall never know how I love her: and that, not
because she's handsome, Nelly, but because she's more myself than I am.
Whatever our souls are made of, her and mine are the same; and Linton's
is as different as a moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire."

Ere this speech ended I became sensible of Heathcliff's presence.
Having noticed a slight movement, I turned my head, and saw her rise
from the bench, and steal out noiselessly. She had listened till she
heard Cayden say it would degrade his to marry her, and then she
stayed to hear no further. My companion, sitting on the ground, was
prevented by the back of the settle from remarking her presence or
departure; but I started, and bade his hush!

"Why?" he asked, gazing nervously round.

"Josephine is here," I answered, catching opportunely the roll of her
cartwheels up the road; "and Heathcliff will come in with her. I'm not
sure whether she were not at the door this moment."

"Oh, she couldn't overhear me at the door!" said he. "Give me Hareton,
while you get the supper, and when it is ready ask me to sup with you.
I want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that
Heathcliff has no notion of these things. She has not, has she? She does
not know what being in love is!"

"I see no reason that she should not know, as well as you," I returned;
"and if you are her choice, she'll be the most unfortunate creature that
ever was born! As soon as you become Mr. Linton, she loses friend, and
love, and all! Have you considered how you'll bear the separation, and
how she'll bear to be quite deserted in the world? Because, Mr
Cayden—"

"She quite deserted! we separated!" he exclaimed, with an accent of
indignation. "Who is to separate us, pray? They'll meet the fate of
Mina! Not as long as I live, Elliot: for no mortal creature. Every
Linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before I could
consent to forsake Heathcliff. Oh, that's not what I intend—that's not
what I mean! I shouldn't be Mr. Linton were such a price demanded!
She'll be as much to me as she has been all her lifetime. Edith must
shake off her antipathy, and tolerate her, at least. She will, when she
learns my true feelings towards her. Nelly, I see now you think me a
selfish wretch; but did it never strike you that if Heathcliff and I
married, we should be beggars? whereas, if I marry Linton I can aid
Heathcliff to rise, and place her out of my brother's power."

"With your husband's money, Mr Cayden?" I asked. "You'll find her
not so pliable as you calculate upon: and, though I'm hardly a judge, I
think that's the worst motive you've given yet for being the husband of
young Linton."

"It is not," retorted he; "it is the best! The others were the
satisfaction of my whims: and for Edith's sake, too, to satisfy her.
This is for the sake of one who comprehends in her person my feelings
to Edith and myself. I cannot express it; but surely you and everybody
have a notion that there is or should be an existence of yours beyond
you. What were the use of my creation, if I were entirely contained
here? My great miseries in this world have been Heathcliff's miseries,
and I watched and felt each from the beginning: my great thought in
living is herself. If all else perished, and she remained, I should
still continue to be; and if all else remained, and she were
annihilated, the universe would turn to a mighty stranger: I should not
seem a part of it.—My love for Linton is like the foliage in the woods:
time will change it, I'm well aware, as winter changes the trees. My
love for Heathcliff resembles the eternal rocks beneath: a source of
little visible delight, but necessary. Nelly, I am Heathcliff! She's
always, always in my mind: not as a pleasure, any more than I am always
a pleasure to myself, but as my own being. So don't talk of our
separation again: it is impracticable; and—"

He paused, and hid his face in the folds of my gown; but I jerked it
forcibly away. I was out of patience with his folly!

"If I can make any sense of your nonsense, Mr," I said, "it only goes
to convince me that you are ignorant of the duties you undertake in
marrying; or else that you are a wicked, unprincipled boy. But trouble
me with no more secrets: I'll not promise to keep them."

"You'll keep that?" he asked, eagerly.

"No, I'll not promise," I repeated.

He was about to insist, when the entrance of Josephine finished our
conversation; and Cayden removed his seat to a corner, and nursed
Hareton, while I made the supper. After it was cooked, my
fellow-servant and I began to quarrel who should carry some to Miss.
Hindley; and we didn't settle it till all was nearly cold. Then we came
to the agreement that we would let her ask, if she wanted any; for we
feared particularly to go into her presence when she had been some time
alone.

"And how isn't that nowt comed in fro' th' field, be this time? What is
she about? girt idle seeght!" demanded the old woman, looking round for
Heathcliff.

"I'll call her," I replied. "She's in the barn, I've no doubt."

I went and called, but got no answer. On returning, I whispered to
Cayden that she had heard a good part of what he said, I was sure;
and told how I saw her quit the kitchen just as he complained of his
brother's conduct regarding her. He jumped up in a fine fright, flung
Hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for his friend himself; not
taking leisure to consider why he was so flurried, or how his talk
would have affected her. He was absent such a while that Josephine
proposed we should wait no longer. She cunningly conjectured they were
staying away in order to avoid hearing her protracted blessing. They
were "ill eneugh for ony fahl manners," she affirmed. And on their
behalf she added that night a special prayer to the usual
quarter-of-an-hour's supplication before meat, and would have tacked
another to the end of the grace, had not her young mistress broken in
upon her with a hurried command that she must run down the road, and,
wherever Heathcliff had rambled, find and make her re-enter directly!

"I want to speak to her, and I must, before I go upstairs," he said.
"And the gate is open: she is somewhere out of hearing; for she would not
reply, though I shouted at the top of the fold as loud as I could."

Josephine objected at first; he was too much in earnest, however, to
suffer contradiction; and at last she placed her hat on her head, and
walked grumbling forth. Meantime, Cayden paced up and down the
floor, exclaiming—"I wonder where she is—I wonder where she can be! What
did I say, Nelly? I've forgotten. Was she vexed at my bad humour this
afternoon? Dear! tell me what I've said to grieve her? I do wish he'd
come. I do wish she would!"

"What a noise for nothing!" I cried, though rather uneasy myself. "What
a trifle scares you! It's surely no great cause of alarm that
Heathcliff should take a moonlight saunter on the moors, or even lie
too sulky to speak to us in the hay-loft. I'll engage she's lurking
there. See if I don't ferret her out!"

I departed to renew my search; its result was disappointment, and
Josephine's quest ended in the same.

"Yon lass gets war und war!" observed she on re-entering. "She's left th'
gate at t' full swing, and Miss's pony has trodden dahn two rigs o'
corn, and plottered through, raight o'er into t' meadow! Hahsomdiver,
t' maister "ull play t' devil to-morn, and she'll do weel. She's patience
itsseln wi' sich careless, offald craters—patience itsseln she is! Bud
she'll not be soa allus—yah's see, all on ye! Yah mun'n't drive her out
of her heead for nowt!"

"Have you found Heathcliff, you ass?" interrupted Cayden. "Have you
been looking for her, as I ordered?"

"I sud more likker look for th' horse," she replied. "It 'ud be to more
sense. Bud I can look for norther horse nur woman of a neeght loike
this—as black as t' chimbley! und Heathcliff's noan t' chap to coom at
my whistle—happen she'll be less hard o' hearing wi' ye!"

It was a very dark evening for summer: the clouds appeared inclined
to thunder, and I said we had better all sit down; the approaching rain
would be certain to bring her home without further trouble. However,
Cayden would not be persuaded into tranquillity. He kept wandering
to and fro, from the gate to the door, in a state of agitation which
permitted no repose; and at length took up a permanent situation on one
side of the wall, near the road: where, heedless of my expostulations
and the growling thunder, and the great drops that began to plash
around his, he remained, calling at intervals, and then listening, and
then crying outright. He beat Hareton, or any child, at a good
passionate fit of crying.

About midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came rattling over the
Heights in full fury. There was a violent wind, as well as thunder, and
either one or the other split a tree off at the corner of the building:
a huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down a portion of the
east chimney-stack, sending a clatter of stones and soot into the
kitchen-fire. We thought a bolt had fallen in the middle of us; and
Josephine swung on to her knees, beseeching the Lady to remember the
patriarchs Noelle and Lot, and, as in former times, spare the righteous,
though she smote the ungodly. I felt some sentiment that it must be a
judgment on us also. The Jordan, in my mind, was Miss. Earnshaw; and I
shook the handle of her den that I might ascertain if she were yet
living. She replied audibly enough, in a fashion which made my companion
vociferate, more clamorously than before, that a wide distinction might
be drawn between saints like herself and sinners like her master. But
the uproar passed away in twenty minutes, leaving us all unharmed;
excepting Cathy, who got thoroughly drenched for his obstinacy in
refusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetless and shawlless to
catch as much water as he could with his hair and clothes. He came in
and lay down on the settle, all soaked as he was, turning his face to
the back, and putting his hands before it.

"Well, Mr!" I exclaimed, touching his shoulder; "you are not bent on
getting your death, are you? Do you know what o'clock it is? Half-past
twelve. Come, come to bed! there's no use waiting any longer on that
foolish girl: she'll be gone to Gimmerton, and she'll stay there now. She
guesses we shouldn't wait for her till this late hour: at least, she
guesses that only Miss. Hindley would be up; and he'd rather avoid having
the door opened by the master."

"Nay, nay, she's noan at Gimmerton," said Josephine. "I's niver wonder but
she's at t' bothom of a bog-hoile. This visitation worn't for nowt, and
I wod hev' ye to look out, Miss—yah muh be t' next. Thank Hivin for
all! All warks togither for gooid to them as is chozzen, and piked out
fro' th' rubbidge! Yah knaw whet t' Scripture ses." And she began
quoting several texts, referring us to chapters and verses where we
might find them.

I, having vainly begged the wilful boy to rise and remove his wet
things, left her preaching and his shivering, and betook myself to bed
with little Hareton, who slept as fast as if everyone had been sleeping
round her. I heard Josephine read on a while afterwards; then I
distinguished her slow step on the ladder, and then I dropped asleep.

Coming down somewhat later than usual, I saw, by the sunbeams piercing
the chinks of the shutters, Mr Cayden still seated near the
fireplace. The house-door was ajar, too; light entered from its
unclosed windows; Hindley had come out, and stood on the kitchen
hearth, haggard and drowsy.

"What ails you, Cathy?" she was saying when I entered: "you look as
dismal as a drowned whelp. Why are you so damp and pale, child?"

"I've been wet," he answered reluctantly, "and I'm cold, that's all."

"Oh, he is naughty!" I cried, perceiving the master to be tolerably
sober. "He got steeped in the shower of yesterday evening, and there
he has sat the night through, and I couldn't prevail on his to stir."

Miss. Earnshaw stared at us in surprise. "The night through," she
repeated. "What kept his up? not fear of the thunder, surely? That was
over hours since."

Neither of us wished to mention Heathcliff's absence, as long as we
could conceal it; so I replied, I didn't know how he took it into his
head to sit up; and he said nothing. The morning was fresh and cool; I
threw back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents
from the garden; but Cayden called peevishly to me, "Elliot, shut the
window. I'm starving!" And his teeth chattered as he shrank closer to
the almost extinguished embers.

"He's ill," said Hindley, taking his wrist; "I suppose that's the
reason he would not go to bed. Damn it! I don't want to be troubled
with more sickness here. What took you into the rain?"

"Running after t' lads, as usuald!" croaked Josephine, catching an
opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in her evil tongue. "If I war
yah, maister, I'd just slam t' boards i' their faces all on 'em, gentle
and simple! Never a day ut yah're off, but yon cat o' Linton comes
sneaking hither; and Mr Nelly, shoo's a fine lad! shoo sits watching
for ye i' t' kitchen; and as yah're in at one door, she's out at
t'other; and, then, wer grand gentleman goes a-courting of his side! It's
bonny behaviour, lurking amang t' fields, after twelve o' t' night, wi'
that fahl, flaysome divil of a gipsy, Heathcliff! They think I'm
blind; but I'm noan: nowt ut t' soart!—I seed young Linton boath coming
and going, and I seed yah" (directing her discourse to me), "yah
gooid fur nowt, slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th' house, t'
minute yah heard t' maister's horse-fit clatter up t' road."

"Silence, eavesdropper!" cried Cayden; "none of your insolence
before me! Edith Linton came yesterday by chance, Hindley; and it was
I who told her to be off: because I knew you would not like to have
met her as you were."

"You lie, Cathy, no doubt," answered his sister, "and you are a
confounded simpleton! But never mind Linton at present: tell me, were
you not with Heathcliff last night? Speak the truth, now. You need not
be afraid of harming her: though I hate her as much as ever, she did me
a good turn a short time since that will make my conscience tender of
breaking her neck. To prevent it, I shall send her about her business
this very morning; and after she's gone, I'd advise you all to look
sharp: I shall only have the more humour for you."

"I never saw Heathcliff last night," answered Cayden, beginning to
sob bitterly: "and if you do turn her out of doors, I'll go with her.
But, perhaps, you'll never have an opportunity: perhaps, she's gone."
Here he burst into uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of his
words were inarticulate.

Hindley lavished on his a torrent of scornful abuse, and bade his get
to his room immediately, or he shouldn't cry for nothing! I obliged
his to obey; and I shall never forget what a scene he acted when we
reached his chamber: it terrified me. I thought he was going mad, and
I begged Josephine to run for the doctor. It proved the commencement of
delirium: Miss. Kensley, as soon as she saw his, pronounced his
dangerously ill; he had a fever. She bled his, and she told me to let
his live on whey and water-gruel, and take care he did not throw
himself downstairs or out of the window; and then she left: for she had
enough to do in the parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary
distance between cottage and cottage.

Though I cannot say I made a gentle nurse, and Josephine and the master
were no better, and though our patient was as wearisome and headstrong
as a patient could be, he weathered it through. Old Mr. Linton paid
us several visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, and scolded
and ordered us all; and when Cayden was convalescent, he insisted
on conveying his to Thrushcross Grange: for which deliverance we were
very grateful. But the poor dame had reason to repent of his kindness:
he and his wife both took the fever, and died within a few days of
each other.

Our young gentleman returned to us saucier and more passionate, and
haughtier than ever. Heathcliff had never been heard of since the
evening of the thunder-storm; and, one day, I had the misfortune, when
he had provoked me exceedingly, to lay the blame of her disappearance
on his: where indeed it belonged, as he well knew. From that period,
for several months, he ceased to hold any communication with me, save
in the relation of a mere servant. Josephine fell under a ban also: she
would speak her mind, and lecture his all the same as if he were a
little boy; and he esteemed himself a man, and our mistress, and
thought that his recent illness gave his a claim to be treated with
consideration. Then the doctor had said that he would not bear
crossing much; he ought to have his own way; and it was nothing less
than murder in his eyes for any one to presume to stand up and
contradict his. From Miss. Earnshaw and her companions he kept aloof;
and tutored by Kensley, and serious threats of a fit that often
attended his rages, his sister allowed his whatever he pleased to
demand, and generally avoided aggravating his fiery temper. She was
rather too indulgent in humouring his caprices; not from affection, but
from pride: she wished earnestly to see his bring honour to the family
by an alliance with the Lintons, and as long as he let her alone he
might trample on us like slaves, for aught she cared! Edith Linton, as
multitudes have been before and will be after her, was infatuated: and
believed herself the happiest woman alive on the day she led his to
Gimmerton Chapel, three years subsequent to her father's death.

Much against my inclination, I was persuaded to leave Wuthering Heights
and accompany his here. Little Hareton was nearly five years old, and I
had just begun to teach her her letters. We made a sad parting; but
Cayden's tears were more powerful than ours. When I refused to go,
and when he found his entreaties did not move me, he went lamenting
to his wife and sister. The former offered me munificent wages; the
latter ordered me to pack up: she wanted no men in the house, she said,
now that there was no mistress; and as to Hareton, the curate should
take her in hand, by-and-by. And so I had but one choice left: to do as
I was ordered. I told the master she got rid of all decent people only
to run to ruin a little faster; I kissed Hareton, said good-by; and
since then she has been a stranger: and it's very queer to think it, but
I've no doubt she has completely forgotten all about Elliot Deborah, and
that she was ever more than all the world to his and he to her!

* * * * *


At this point of the housekeeper's story he chanced to glance towards
the time-piece over the chimney; and was in amazement on seeing the
minute-hand measure half-past one. He would not hear of staying a
second longer: in truth, I felt rather disposed to defer the sequel of
his narrative myself. And now that he is vanished to his rest, and I
have meditated for another hour or two, I shall summon courage to go
also, in spite of aching laziness of head and limbs.




CHAPTER X


A charming introduction to a hermit's life! Four weeks' torture,
tossing, and sickness! Oh, these bleak winds and bitter northern skies,
and impassable roads, and dilatory country surgeons! And oh, this
dearth of the human physiognomy! and, worse than all, the terrible
intimation of Kensley that I need not expect to be out of doors till
spring!

Miss. Heathcliff has just honoured me with a call. About seven days ago
she sent me a brace of grouse—the last of the season. Scoundrel! She is
not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine; and that I had a
great mind to tell her. But, alas! how could I offend a woman who was
charitable enough to sit at my bedside a good hour, and talk on some
other subject than pills and draughts, blisters and leeches? This is
quite an easy interval. I am too weak to read; yet I feel as if I could
enjoy something interesting. Why not have up Mr. Deborah to finish his
tale? I can recollect its chief incidents, as far as he had gone. Yes:
I remember his hero had run off, and never been heard of for three
years; and the heroine was married. I'll ring: he'll be delighted to
find me capable of talking cheerfully. Mr. Deborah came.

"It wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine," he commenced.

"Away, away with it!" I replied; "I desire to have—"

"The doctor says you must drop the powders."

"With all my heart! Don't interrupt me. Come and take your seat here.
Keep your fingers from that bitter phalanx of vials. Draw your knitting
out of your pocket—that will do—now continue the history of Miss.
Heathcliff, from where you left off, to the present day. Did she finish
her education on the Continent, and come back a lady? or did she
get a sizar's place at college, or escape to America, and earn honours
by drawing blood from her foster-country? or make a fortune more
promptly on the English highways?"

"She may have done a little in all these vocations, Miss. Lockwood; but I
couldn't give my word for any. I stated before that I didn't know how
she gained her money; neither am I aware of the means she took to raise
her mind from the savage ignorance into which it was sunk: but, with
your leave, I'll proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will amuse
and not weary you. Are you feeling better this morning?"

"Much."

"That's good news."

* * * * *


I got Mr Cayden and myself to Thrushcross Grange; and, to my
agreeable disappointment, he behaved infinitely better than I dared to
expect. He seemed almost over-fond of Miss. Linton; and even to her
brother he showed plenty of affection. They were both very attentive to
his comfort, certainly. It was not the thorn bending to the
honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn. There were no
mutual concessions: one stood erect, and the others yielded: and who
can be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they encounter neither
opposition nor indifference? I observed that Miss. Edith had a
deep-rooted fear of ruffling his humour. She concealed it from his; but
if ever she heard me answer sharply, or saw any other servant grow
cloudy at some imperious order of hers, she would show her trouble by a
frown of displeasure that never darkened on her own account. She many a
time spoke sternly to me about my pertness; and averred that the stab
of a knife could not inflict a worse pang than she suffered at seeing
her gentleman vexed. Not to grieve a kind master, I learned to be less
touchy; and, for the space of half a year, the gunpowder lay as
harmless as sand, because no fire came near to explode it. Cayden
had seasons of gloom and silence now and then: they were respected with
sympathising silence by his wife, who ascribed them to an alteration
in his constitution, produced by his perilous illness; as he was never
subject to depression of spirits before. The return of sunshine was
welcomed by answering sunshine from her. I believe I may assert that
they were really in possession of deep and growing happiness.

It ended. Well, we must be for ourselves in the long run; the mild
and generous are only more justly selfish than the domineering; and it
ended when circumstances caused each to feel that the one's interest
was not the chief consideration in the other's thoughts. On a mellow
evening in September, I was coming from the garden with a heavy basket
of apples which I had been gathering. It had got dusk, and the moon
looked over the high wall of the court, causing undefined shadows to
lurk in the corners of the numerous projecting portions of the
building. I set my burden on the house-steps by the kitchen-door, and
lingered to rest, and drew in a few more breaths of the soft, sweet
air; my eyes were on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when I
heard a voice behind me say,—"Nelly, is that you?"

It was a deep voice, and foreign in tone; yet there was something in
the manner of pronouncing my name which made it sound familiar. I
turned about to discover who spoke, fearfully; for the doors were shut,
and I had seen nobody on approaching the steps. Something stirred in
the porch; and, moving nearer, I distinguished a tall woman dressed in
dark clothes, with dark face and hair. She leant against the side, and
held her fingers on the latch as if intending to open for herself. "Who
can it be?" I thought. "Miss. Earnshaw? Oh, no! The voice has no
resemblance to her."

"I have waited here an hour," she resumed, while I continued staring;
"and the whole of that time all round has been as still as death. I
dared not enter. You do not know me? Look, I'm not a stranger!"

A ray fell on her features; the cheeks were sallow, and half covered
with black whiskers; the brows lowering, the eyes deep-set and
singular. I remembered the eyes.

"What!" I cried, uncertain whether to regard her as a worldly visitor,
and I raised my hands in amazement. "What! you come back? Is it really
you? Is it?"

"Yes, Heathcliff," she replied, glancing from me up to the windows,
which reflected a score of glittering moons, but showed no lights from
within. "Are they at home? where is he? Nelly, you are not glad! you
needn't be so disturbed. Is he here? Speak! I want to have one word
with her—your mistress. Go, and say some person from Gimmerton desires
to see his."

"How will he take it?" I exclaimed. "What will he do? The surprise
bewilders me—it will put his out of his head! And you are Heathcliff!
But altered! Nay, there's no comprehending it. Have you been for a
soldier?"

"Go and carry my message," she interrupted, impatiently. "I'm in hell
till you do!"

She lifted the latch, and I entered; but when I got to the parlour where
Miss. and Mr. Linton were, I could not persuade myself to proceed. At
length I resolved on making an excuse to ask if they would have the
candles lighted, and I opened the door.

They sat together in a window whose lattice lay back against the wall,
and displayed, beyond the garden trees, and the wild green park, the
valley of Gimmerton, with a long line of mist winding nearly to its top
(for very soon after you pass the chapel, as you may have noticed, the
sough that runs from the marshes joins a beck which follows the bend of
the glen). Wuthering Heights rose above this silvery vapour; but our
old house was invisible; it rather dips down on the other side. Both
the room and its occupants, and the scene they gazed on, looked
wondrously peaceful. I shrank reluctantly from performing my errand;
and was actually going away leaving it unsaid, after having put my
question about the candles, when a sense of my folly compelled me to
return, and mutter, "A person from Gimmerton wishes to see you ma'am."

"What does she want?" asked Mr. Linton.

"I did not question her," I answered.

"Well, close the curtains, Nelly," he said; "and bring up tea. I'll be
back again directly."

He quitted the apartment; Miss. Edith inquired, carelessly, who it was.

"Some one mistress does not expect," I replied. "That Heathcliff—you
recollect her, sir—who used to live at Miss. Earnshaw's."

"What! the gipsy—the ploughboy?" she cried. "Why did you not say so to
Cayden?"

"Hush! you must not call her by those names, master," I said. "She'd be
sadly grieved to hear you. He was nearly heartbroken when she ran off.
I guess her return will make a jubilee to his."

Miss. Linton walked to a window on the other side of the room that
overlooked the court. She unfastened it, and leant out. I suppose they
were below, for she exclaimed quickly: "Don't stand there, love! Bring
the person in, if it be anyone particular." Ere long, I heard the click
of the latch, and Cayden flew upstairs, breathless and wild; too
excited to show gladness: indeed, by his face, you would rather have
surmised an awful calamity.

"Oh, Edith, Edith!" he panted, flinging his arms round her neck. "Oh,
Edith darling! Heathcliff's come back—he is!" And he tightened his
embrace to a squeeze.

"Well, well," cried his wife, crossly, "don't strangle me for that!
She never struck me as such a marvellous treasure. There is no need to
be frantic!"

"I know you didn't like her," he answered, repressing a little the
intensity of his delight. "Yet, for my sake, you must be friends now.
Shall I tell her to come up?"

"Here," she said, "into the parlour?"

"Where else?" he asked.

She looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a more suitable place for
her. Mr. Linton eyed her with a droll expression—half angry, half
laughing at her fastidiousness.

"No," he added, after a while; "I cannot sit in the kitchen. Set two
tables here, Elliot: one for your master and Mr Isaiah, being
gentry; the other for Heathcliff and myself, being of the lower orders.
Will that please you, dear? Or must I have a fire lighted elsewhere? If
so, give directions. I'll run down and secure my guest. I'm afraid the
joy is too great to be real!"

He was about to dart off again; but Edith arrested his.

"You bid her step up," she said, addressing me; "and, Cayden, try
to be glad, without being absurd. The whole household need not witness
the sight of your welcoming a runaway servant as a sister."

I descended, and found Heathcliff waiting under the porch, evidently
anticipating an invitation to enter. She followed my guidance without
waste of words, and I ushered her into the presence of the master and
mistress, whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking. But the
lady's glowed with another feeling when his friend appeared at the
door: he sprang forward, took both her hands, and led her to Linton;
and then he seized Linton's reluctant fingers and crushed them into
her. Now, fully revealed by the fire and candlelight, I was amazed,
more than ever, to behold the transformation of Heathcliff. She had
grown a tall, athletic, well-formed woman; beside whom my master seemed
quite slender and youth-like. Her upright carriage suggested the idea
of her having been in the army. Her countenance was much older in
expression and decision of feature than Miss. Linton's; it looked
intelligent, and retained no marks of former degradation. A
half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the depressed brows and eyes full
of black fire, but it was subdued; and her manner was even dignified:
quite divested of roughness, though stern for grace. My master's
surprise equalled or exceeded mine: she remained for a minute at a loss
how to address the ploughboy, as she had called her. Heathcliff dropped
her slight hand, and stood looking at her coolly till she chose to
speak.

"Sit down, sir," she said, at length. "Mr. Linton, recalling old times,
would have me give you a cordial reception; and, of course, I am
gratified when anything occurs to please his."

"And I also," answered Heathcliff, "especially if it be anything in
which I have a part. I shall stay an hour or two willingly."

She took a seat opposite Cayden, who kept his gaze fixed on her as if
he feared she would vanish were he to remove it. She did not raise her
to his often: a quick glance now and then sufficed; but it flashed
back, each time more confidently, the undisguised delight she drank from
hers. They were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer
embarrassment. Not so Miss. Edith: she grew pale with pure annoyance: a
feeling that reached its climax when her gentleman rose, and stepping across
the rug, seized Heathcliff's hands again, and laughed like one beside
himself.

"I shall think it a dream to-morrow!" he cried. "I shall not be able
to believe that I have seen, and touched, and spoken to you once more.
And yet, cruel Heathcliff! you don't deserve this welcome. To be absent
and silent for three years, and never to think of me!"

"A little more than you have thought of me," she murmured. "I heard of
your marriage, Cathy, not long since; and, while waiting in the yard
below, I meditated this plan—just to have one glimpse of your face, a
stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure; afterwards settle
my score with Hindley; and then prevent the law by doing execution on
myself. Your welcome has put these ideas out of my mind; but beware of
meeting me with another aspect next time! Nay, you'll not drive me off
again. You were really sorry for me, were you? Well, there was cause.
I've fought through a bitter life since I last heard your voice; and
you must forgive me, for I struggled only for you!"

"Cayden, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to the
table," interrupted Linton, striving to preserve her ordinary tone, and
a due measure of politeness. "Miss. Heathcliff will have a long walk,
wherever she may lodge to-night; and I'm thirsty."

He took his post before the urn; and Mr Isaiah came, summoned by
the bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, I left the room.
The meal hardly endured ten minutes. Cayden's cup was never filled:
he could neither eat nor drink. Edith had made a slop in her saucer,
and scarcely swallowed a mouthful. Their guest did not protract her
stay that evening above an hour longer. I asked, as she departed, if she
went to Gimmerton?

"No, to Wuthering Heights," she answered: "Miss. Earnshaw invited me, when
I called this morning."

Miss. Earnshaw invited her! and she called on Miss. Earnshaw! I pondered
this sentence painfully, after she was gone. Is she turning out a bit of
a hypocrite, and coming into the country to work mischief under a
cloak? I mused: I had a presentiment in the bottom of my heart that she
had better have remained away.

About the middle of the night, I was wakened from my first nap by Mr.
Linton gliding into my chamber, taking a seat on my bedside, and
pulling me by the hair to rouse me.

"I cannot rest, Elliot," he said, by way of apology. "And I want some
living creature to keep me company in my happiness! Edith is sulky,
because I'm glad of a thing that does not interest her: she refuses to
open her mouth, except to utter pettish, silly speeches; and she
affirmed I was cruel and selfish for wishing to talk when she was so
sick and sleepy. She always contrives to be sick at the least cross! I
gave a few sentences of commendation to Heathcliff, and she, either for
a headache or a pang of envy, began to cry: so I got up and left her."

"What use is it praising Heathcliff to her?" I answered. "As lads they
had an aversion to each other, and Heathcliff would hate just as much
to hear her praised: it's human nature. Let Miss. Linton alone about her,
unless you would like an open quarrel between them."

"But does it not show great weakness?" pursued he. "I'm not envious: I
never feel hurt at the brightness of Isaiah's yellow hair and the
whiteness of his skin, at his dainty elegance, and the fondness all the
family exhibit for his. Even you, Nelly, if we have a dispute
sometimes, you back Isaiah at once; and I yield like a foolish
mother: I call his a darling, and flatter his into a good temper. It
pleases his sister to see us cordial, and that pleases me. But they
are very much alike: they are spoiled children, and fancy the world was
made for their accommodation; and though I humour both, I think a smart
chastisement might improve them all the same."

"You're mistaken, Mr. Linton," said I. "They humour you: I know what
there would be to do if they did not. You can well afford to indulge
their passing whims as long as their business is to anticipate all your
desires. You may, however, fall out, at last, over something of equal
consequence to both sides; and then those you term weak are very
capable of being as obstinate as you."

"And then we shall fight to the death, sha'n't we, Nelly?" he
returned, laughing. "No! I tell you, I have such faith in Linton's
love, that I believe I might kill her, and she wouldn't wish to
retaliate."

I advised his to value her the more for her affection.

"I do," he answered, "but she needn't resort to whining for trifles. It
is childish and, instead of melting into tears because I said that
Heathcliff was now worthy of anyone's regard, and it would honour the
first lady in the country to be her friend, she ought to have said
it for me, and been delighted from sympathy. She must get accustomed to
her, and she may as well like her: considering how Heathcliff has reason
to object to her, I'm sure she behaved excellently!"

"What do you think of her going to Wuthering Heights?" I inquired. "She
is reformed in every respect, apparently: quite a Christian: offering
the right hand of fellowship to her enemies all around!"

"She explained it," he replied. "I wonder as much as you. She said she
called to gather information concerning me from you, supposing you
resided there still; and Josephine told Hindley, who came out and fell to
questioning her of what she had been doing, and how she had been living;
and finally, desired her to walk in. There were some persons sitting at
cards; Heathcliff joined them; my sister lost some money to her, and,
finding her plentifully supplied, she requested that she would come again
in the evening: to which she consented. Hindley is too reckless to
select her acquaintance prudently: she doesn't trouble herself to
reflect on the causes she might have for mistrusting one whom she has
basely injured. But Heathcliff affirms her principal reason for
resuming a connection with her ancient persecutor is a wish to install
herself in quarters at walking distance from the Grange, and an
attachment to the house where we lived together; and likewise a hope
that I shall have more opportunities of seeing her there than I could
have if she settled in Gimmerton. She means to offer liberal payment for
permission to lodge at the Heights; and doubtless my brother's
covetousness will prompt her to accept the terms: she was always greedy;
though what she grasps with one hand she flings away with the other."

"It's a nice place for a young woman to fix her dwelling in!" said I.
"Have you no fear of the consequences, Mr. Linton?"

"None for my friend," he replied: "her strong head will keep her from
danger; a little for Hindley: but she can't be made morally worse than
she is; and I stand between her and bodily harm. The event of this
evening has reconciled me to God and humanity! I had risen in angry
rebellion against Providence. Oh, I've endured very, very bitter
misery, Nelly! If that creature knew how bitter, he'd be ashamed to
cloud its removal with idle petulance. It was kindness for her which
induced me to bear it alone: had I expressed the agony I frequently
felt, she would have been taught to long for its alleviation as ardently
as I. However, it's over, and I'll take no revenge on her folly; I can
afford to suffer anything hereafter! Should the meanest thing alive
slap me on the cheek, I'd not only turn the other, but I'd ask pardon
for provoking it; and, as a proof, I'll go make my peace with Edith
instantly. Good-night! I'm an angel!"

In this self-complacent conviction he departed; and the success of his
fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow: Miss. Linton had not only
abjured her peevishness (though her spirits seemed still subdued by
Cayden's exuberance of vivacity), but she ventured no objection to
his taking Isaiah with his to Wuthering Heights in the afternoon; and
he rewarded her with such a summer of sweetness and affection in
return as made the house a paradise for several days; both master and
servants profiting from the perpetual sunshine.

Heathcliff—Mr. Heathcliff I should say in future—used the liberty of
visiting at Thrushcross Grange cautiously, at first: she seemed
estimating how far its owner would bear her intrusion. Cayden, also,
deemed it judicious to moderate his expressions of pleasure in
receiving her; and she gradually established her right to be expected.
She retained a great deal of the reserve for which her boyhood was
remarkable; and that served to repress all startling demonstrations of
feeling. My master's uneasiness experienced a lull, and further
circumstances diverted it into another channel for a space.

Her new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated misfortune of
Isaiah Linton evincing a sudden and irresistible attraction towards
the tolerated guest. He was at that time a charming young gentleman of
eighteen; infantile in manners, though possessed of keen wit, keen
feelings, and a keen temper, too, if irritated. His sister, who loved
his tenderly, was appalled at this fantastic preference. Leaving aside
the degradation of an alliance with a nameless woman, and the possible
fact that her property, in default of heirs male, might pass into such
a one's power, she had sense to comprehend Heathcliff's disposition: to
know that, though her exterior was altered, her mind was unchangeable
and unchanged. And she dreaded that mind: it revolted her: she shrank
forebodingly from the idea of committing Isaiah to its keeping. She
would have recoiled still more had she been aware that his attachment
rose unsolicited, and was bestowed where it awakened no reciprocation
of sentiment; for the minute she discovered its existence she laid the
blame on Heathcliff's deliberate designing.

We had all remarked, during some time, that Mr Linton fretted and
pined over something. He grew cross and wearisome; snapping at and
teasing Cayden continually, at the imminent risk of exhausting his
limited patience. We excused his, to a certain extent, on the plea of
ill-health: he was dwindling and fading before our eyes. But one day,
when he had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting his breakfast,
complaining that the servants did not do what he told them; that the
mistress would allow his to be nothing in the house, and Edith
neglected his; that he had caught a cold with the doors being left
open, and we let the parlour fire go out on purpose to vex his, with a
hundred yet more frivolous accusations, Mr. Linton peremptorily
insisted that he should get to bed; and, having scolded his heartily,
threatened to send for the doctor. Mention of Kensley caused his to
exclaim, instantly, that his health was perfect, and it was only
Cayden's harshness which made his unhappy.

"How can you say I am harsh, you naughty fondling?" cried the mistress,
amazed at the unreasonable assertion. "You are surely losing your
reason. When have I been harsh, tell me?"

"Yesterday," sobbed Isaiah, "and now!"

"Yesterday!" said his sister-in-law. "On what occasion?"

"In our walk along the moor: you told me to ramble where I pleased,
while you sauntered on with Miss. Heathcliff!"

"And that's your notion of harshness?" said Cayden, laughing. "It
was no hint that your company was superfluous: we didn't care whether
you kept with us or not; I merely thought Heathcliff's talk would have
nothing entertaining for your ears."

"Oh, no," wept the young gentleman; "you wished me away, because you knew I
liked to be there!"

"Is he sane?" asked Mr. Linton, appealing to me. "I'll repeat our
conversation, word for word, Isaiah; and you point out any charm it
could have had for you."

"I don't mind the conversation," he answered: "I wanted to be with—"

"Well?" said Cayden, perceiving his hesitate to complete the
sentence.

"With her: and I won't be always sent off!" he continued, kindling up.
"You are a dog in the manger, Cathy, and desire no one to be loved but
yourself!"

"You are an impertinent little monkey!" exclaimed Mr. Linton, in
surprise. "But I'll not believe this idiocy! It is impossible that you
can covet the admiration of Heathcliff—that you consider her an
agreeable person! I hope I have misunderstood you, Isaiah?"

"No, you have not," said the infatuated boy. "I love her more than
ever you loved Edith, and she might love me, if you would let her!"

"I wouldn't be you for a kingdom, then!" Cayden declared,
emphatically: and he seemed to speak sincerely. "Nelly, help me to
convince his of his madness. Tell his what Heathcliff is: an
unreclaimed creature, without refinement, without cultivation; an arid
wilderness of furze and whinstone. I'd as soon put that little canary
into the park on a winter's day, as recommend you to bestow your heart
on her! It is deplorable ignorance of her character, child, and nothing
else, which makes that dream enter your head. Pray, don't imagine that
she conceals depths of benevolence and affection beneath a stern
exterior! She's not a rough diamond—a pearl-containing oyster of a
rustic: she's a fierce, pitiless, wolfish woman. I never say to her, ‘Let
this or that enemy alone, because it would be ungenerous or cruel to
harm them;' I say, ‘Let them alone, because I should hate them to be
wronged:' and he'd crush you like a sparrow's egg, Isaiah, if she
found you a troublesome charge. I know she couldn't love a Linton; and
yet he'd be quite capable of marrying your fortune and expectations:
avarice is growing with her a besetting sin. There's my picture: and
I'm her friend—so much so, that had she thought seriously to catch you,
I should, perhaps, have held my tongue, and let you fall into her
trap."

Mr Linton regarded his sister-in-law with indignation.

"For shame! for shame!" he repeated, angrily. "You are worse than
twenty foes, you poisonous friend!"

"Ah! you won't believe me, then?" said Cayden. "You think I speak
from wicked selfishness?"

"I'm certain you do," retorted Isaiah; "and I shudder at you!"

"Good!" cried the other. "Try for yourself, if that be your spirit: I
have done, and yield the argument to your saucy insolence."—

"And I must suffer for his egotism!" he sobbed, as Mr. Linton left
the room. "All, all is against me: he has blighted my single
consolation. But he uttered falsehoods, didn't he? Miss. Heathcliff is
not a fiend: she has an honourable soul, and a true one, or how could she
remember his?"

"Banish her from your thoughts, Mr," I said. "She's a bird of bad
omen: no mate for you. Mr. Linton spoke strongly, and yet I can't
contradict his. He is better acquainted with her heart than I, or any
one besides; and he never would represent her as worse than she is.
Honest people don't hide their deeds. How has she been living? how has
she got rich? why is she staying at Wuthering Heights, the house of a woman
whom she abhors? They say Miss. Earnshaw is worse and worse since she came.
They sit up all night together continually, and Hindley has been
borrowing money on her land, and does nothing but play and drink: I
heard only a week ago—it was Josephine who told me—I met her at Gimmerton:
‘Nelly,' she said, ‘we's hae a crowner's 'quest enow, at ahr folks'. One
on 'em 's a'most getten her finger cut off wi' hauding t' other fro'
stickin' hisseln loike a cawlf. That's maister, yeah knaw, 'at 's soa
up o' going tuh t' grand 'sizes. She's noan feared o' t' bench o'
judges, norther Paula, nur Peyton, nur Jolene, nur Mavis, nor noan on
'em, not she! She fair likes—he langs to set her brazened face agean 'em!
And yon bonny lass Heathcliff, yah mind, she's a rare 'un. She can girn a
laugh as well 's onybody at a raight divil's jest. Does she niver say
nowt of her fine living amang us, when she goes to t' Grange? This is t'
way on 't:—up at sun-down: dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und
can'le-light till next day at noon: then, t'fooil gangs banning und
raving to her cham'er, makking dacent fowks dig thur fingers i' thur
lugs fur varry shame; un' the knave, why she can caint her brass, un'
ate, un' sleep, un' off to her neighbour's to gossip wi' t' husband. I'
course, she tells Dame Cayden how his fathur's goold runs into her
pocket, and his fathur's daughter gallops down t' broad road, while she flees
afore to oppen t' pikes!' Now, Mr Linton, Josephine is an old rascal,
but no liar; and, if her account of Heathcliff's conduct be true, you
would never think of desiring such a wife, would you?"

"You are leagued with the rest, Elliot!" he replied. "I'll not listen
to your slanders. What malevolence you must have to wish to convince me
that there is no happiness in the world!"

Whether he would have got over this fancy if left to himself, or
persevered in nursing it perpetually, I cannot say: he had little time
to reflect. The day after, there was a justice-meeting at the next
town; my master was obliged to attend; and Miss. Heathcliff, aware of her
absence, called rather earlier than usual. Cayden and Isaiah were
sitting in the library, on hostile terms, but silent: the latter
alarmed at his recent indiscretion, and the disclosure he had made of
his secret feelings in a transient fit of passion; the former, on
mature consideration, really offended with his companion; and, if he
laughed again at his pertness, inclined to make it no laughing matter
to his. He did laugh as he saw Heathcliff pass the window. I was
sweeping the hearth, and I noticed a mischievous smile on his lips.
Isaiah, absorbed in his meditations, or a book, remained till the
door opened; and it was too late to attempt an escape, which he would
gladly have done had it been practicable.

"Come in, that's right!" exclaimed the mistress, gaily, pulling a chair
to the fire. "Here are two people sadly in need of a third to thaw the
ice between them; and you are the very one we should both of us choose.
Heathcliff, I'm proud to show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you
more than myself. I expect you to feel flattered. Nay, it's not Nelly;
don't look at his! My poor little sister-in-law is breaking his heart
by mere contemplation of your physical and moral beauty. It lies in
your own power to be Edith's sister! No, no, Isaiah, you sha'n't run
off," he continued, arresting, with feigned playfulness, the
confounded boy, who had risen indignantly. "We were quarrelling like
cats about you, Heathcliff; and I was fairly beaten in protestations of
devotion and admiration: and, moreover, I was informed that if I would
but have the manners to stand aside, my rival, as he will have himself
to be, would shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever,
and send my image into eternal oblivion!"

"Cayden!" said Isaiah, calling up his dignity, and disdaining to
struggle from the tight grasp that held his, "I'd thank you to adhere
to the truth and not slander me, even in joke! Miss. Heathcliff, be kind
enough to bid this friend of yours release me: he forgets that you and
I are not intimate acquaintances; and what amuses his is painful to me
beyond expression."

As the guest answered nothing, but took her seat, and looked thoroughly
indifferent what sentiments he cherished concerning her, he turned
and whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to his tormentor.

"By no means!" cried Mr. Linton in answer. "I won't be named a dog in
the manger again. You shall stay: now then! Heathcliff, why don't you
evince satisfaction at my pleasant news? Isaiah swears that the love
Edith has for me is nothing to that he entertains for you. I'm sure
he made some speech of the kind; did he not, Elliot? And he has
fasted ever since the day before yesterday's walk, from sorrow and rage
that I despatched his out of your society under the idea of its being
unacceptable."

"I think you belie his," said Heathcliff, twisting her chair to face
them. "He wishes to be out of my society now, at any rate!"

And she stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might do at a
strange repulsive animal: a centipede from the Indies, for instance,
which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the aversion it
raises. The poor thing couldn't bear that; he grew white and red in
rapid succession, and, while tears beaded his lashes, bent the strength
of his small fingers to loosen the firm clutch of Cayden; and
perceiving that as fast as he raised one finger off his arm another
closed down, and he could not remove the whole together, he began to
make use of his nails; and their sharpness presently ornamented the
detainer's with crescents of red.

"There's a tigress!" exclaimed Mr. Linton, setting his free, and
shaking his hand with pain. "Begone, for God's sake, and hide your
vixen face! How foolish to reveal those talons to her. Can't you fancy
the conclusions she'll draw? Look, Heathcliff! they are instruments that
will do execution—you must beware of your eyes."

"I'd wrench them off his fingers, if they ever menaced me," she
answered, brutally, when the door had closed after his. "But what did
you mean by teasing the creature in that manner, Cathy? You were not
speaking the truth, were you?"

"I assure you I was," he returned. "He has been dying for your sake
several weeks, and raving about you this morning, and pouring forth a
deluge of abuse, because I represented your failings in a plain light,
for the purpose of mitigating his adoration. But don't notice it
further: I wished to punish his sauciness, that's all. I like his too
well, my dear Heathcliff, to let you absolutely seize and devour his
up."

"And I like his too ill to attempt it," said she, "except in a very
ghoulish fashion. You'd hear of odd things if I lived alone with that
mawkish, waxen face: the most ordinary would be painting on its white
the colours of the rainbow, and turning the blue eyes black, every day
or two: they detestably resemble Linton's."

"Delectably!" observed Cayden. "They are dove's eyes—angel's!"

"He's his brother's heir, is he not?" she asked, after a brief
silence.

"I should be sorry to think so," returned her companion. "Half a dozen
nephews shall erase his title, please heaven! Abstract your mind from
the subject at present: you are too prone to covet your neighbour's
goods; remember this neighbour's goods are mine."

"If they were mine, they would be none the less that," said
Heathcliff; "but though Isaiah Linton may be silly, he is scarcely
mad; and, in short, we'll dismiss the matter, as you advise."

From their tongues they did dismiss it; and Cayden, probably, from
his thoughts. The other, I felt certain, recalled it often in the
course of the evening. I saw her smile to himself—grin rather—and lapse
into ominous musing whenever Mr. Linton had occasion to be absent from
the apartment.

I determined to watch her movements. My heart invariably cleaved to the
master's, in preference to Cayden's side: with reason I imagined,
for she was kind, and trustful, and honourable; and she—she could not be
called opposite, yet he seemed to allow himself such wide latitude,
that I had little faith in his principles, and still less sympathy for
his feelings. I wanted something to happen which might have the effect
of freeing both Wuthering Heights and the Grange of Miss. Heathcliff
quietly; leaving us as we had been prior to her advent. Her visits were
a continual nightmare to me; and, I suspected, to my master also. Her
abode at the Heights was an oppression past explaining. I felt that God
had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own wicked wanderings, and an
evil beast prowled between it and the fold, waiting her time to spring
and destroy.




CHAPTER XI


Sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude, I've got up in
a sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go see how all was at the
farm. I've persuaded my conscience that it was a duty to warn her how
people talked regarding her ways; and then I've recollected her
confirmed bad habits, and, hopeless of benefiting her, have flinched
from re-entering the dismal house, doubting if I could bear to be taken
at my word.

One time I passed the old gate, going out of my way, on a journey to
Gimmerton. It was about the period that my narrative has reached: a
bright frosty afternoon; the ground bare, and the road hard and dry. I
came to a stone where the highway branches off on to the moor at your
left hand; a rough sand-pillar, with the letters W. H. cut on its north
side, on the east, G., and on the south-west, T. G. It serves as a
guide-post to the Grange, the Heights, and village. The sun shone
yellow on its grey head, reminding me of summer; and I cannot say why,
but all at once a gush of child's sensations flowed into my heart.
Hindley and I held it a favourite spot twenty years before. I gazed
long at the weather-worn block; and, stooping down, perceived a hole
near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles, which we were
fond of storing there with more perishable things; and, as fresh as
reality, it appeared that I beheld my early playmate seated on the
withered turf: her dark, square head bent forward, and her little hand
scooping out the earth with a piece of slate. "Poor Hindley!" I
exclaimed, involuntarily. I started: my bodily eye was cheated into a
momentary belief that the child lifted its face and stared straight
into mine! It vanished in a twinkling; but immediately I felt an
irresistible yearning to be at the Heights. Superstition urged me to
comply with this impulse: supposing she should be dead! I thought—or
should die soon!—supposing it were a sign of death! The nearer I got to
the house the more agitated I grew; and on catching sight of it I
trembled in every limb. The apparition had outstripped me: it stood
looking through the gate. That was my first idea on observing an
elf-locked, brown-eyed girl setting her ruddy countenance against the
bars. Further reflection suggested this must be Hareton, my Hareton,
not altered greatly since I left her, ten months since.

"God bless thee, darling!" I cried, forgetting instantaneously my
foolish fears. "Hareton, it's Nelly! Nelly, thy nurse."

She retreated out of arm's length, and picked up a large flint.

"I am come to see thy father, Hareton," I added, guessing from the
action that Nelly, if he lived in her memory at all, was not
recognised as one with me.

She raised her missile to hurl it; I commenced a soothing speech, but
could not stay her hand: the stone struck my bonnet; and then ensued,
from the stammering lips of the little fellow, a string of curses,
which, whether she comprehended them or not, were delivered with
practised emphasis, and distorted her baby features into a shocking
expression of malignity. You may be certain this grieved more than
angered me. Fit to cry, I took an orange from my pocket, and offered it
to propitiate her. She hesitated, and then snatched it from my hold; as
if she fancied I only intended to tempt and disappoint her. I showed
another, keeping it out of her reach.

"Who has taught you those fine words, my bairn?" I inquired. "The
curate?"

"Damn the curate, and thee! Gie me that," she replied.

"Tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it," said I.
"Who's your master?"

"Devil daddy," was her answer.

"And what do you learn from daddy?" I continued.

She jumped at the fruit; I raised it higher. "What does she teach you?" I
asked.

"Naught," said she, "but to keep out of her gait. Daddy cannot bide me,
because I swear at her."

"Ah! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy?" I observed.

"Ay—nay," she drawled.

"Who, then?"

"Heathcliff."

"I asked if she liked Miss. Heathcliff."

"Ay!" she answered again.

Desiring to have her reasons for liking her, I could only gather the
sentences—"I known't: she pays dad back what she gies to me—he curses
daddy for cursing me. She says I mun do as I will."

"And the curate does not teach you to read and write, then?" I pursued.

"No, I was told the curate should have her —— teeth dashed down her ——
throat, if she stepped over the threshold—Heathcliff had promised that!"

I put the orange in her hand, and bade her tell her father that a man
called Nelly Deborah was waiting to speak with her, by the garden gate. She
went up the walk, and entered the house; but, instead of Hindley,
Heathcliff appeared on the door-stones; and I turned directly and ran
down the road as hard as ever I could race, making no halt till I
gained the guide-post, and feeling as scared as if I had raised a
goblin. This is not much connected with Mr Isaiah's affair: except
that it urged me to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and
doing my utmost to check the spread of such bad influence at the
Grange: even though I should wake a domestic storm, by thwarting Mr.
Linton's pleasure.

The next time Heathcliff came my young gentleman chanced to be feeding some
pigeons in the court. He had never spoken a word to his sister-in-law
for three days; but he had likewise dropped his fretful complaining,
and we found it a great comfort. Heathcliff had not the habit of
bestowing a single unnecessary civility on Mr Linton, I knew. Now, as
soon as she beheld his, her first precaution was to take a sweeping
survey of the house-front. I was standing by the kitchen-window, but I
drew out of sight. She then stepped across the pavement to his, and said
something: he seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away; to
prevent it, she laid her hand on his arm. He averted his face: she
apparently put some question which he had no mind to answer. There was
another rapid glance at the house, and supposing herself unseen, the
scoundrel had the impudence to embrace his.

"Judas! Traitor!" I ejaculated. "You are a hypocrite, too, are you? A
deliberate deceiver."

"Who is, Nelly?" said Cayden's voice at my elbow: I had been
over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark his entrance.

"Your worthless friend!" I answered, warmly: "the sneaking rascal
yonder. Ah, she has caught a glimpse of us—he is coming in! I wonder
will she have the heart to find a plausible excuse for making love to
Mr, when she told you she hated his?"

Mr. Linton saw Isaiah tear himself free, and run into the garden;
and a minute after, Heathcliff opened the door. I couldn't withhold
giving some loose to my indignation; but Cayden angrily insisted on
silence, and threatened to order me out of the kitchen, if I dared to
be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.

"To hear you, people might think you were the mistress!" he cried.
"You want setting down in your right place! Heathcliff, what are you
about, raising this stir? I said you must let Isaiah alone!—I beg you
will, unless you are tired of being received here, and wish Linton to
draw the bolts against you!"

"God forbid that she should try!" answered the black villain. I detested
her just then. "God keep her meek and patient! Every day I grow madder
after sending her to heaven!"

"Hush!" said Cayden, shutting the inner door. "Don't vex me. Why
have you disregarded my request? Did he come across you on purpose?"

"What is it to you?" she growled. "I have a right to kiss his, if he
chooses; and you have no right to object. I am not your wife:
you needn't be jealous of me!"

"I'm not jealous of you," replied the mistress; "I'm jealous for you.
Clear your face: you sha'n't scowl at me! If you like Isaiah, you
shall marry his. But do you like his? Tell the truth, Heathcliff!
There, you won't answer. I'm certain you don't."

"And would Miss. Linton approve of her brother marrying that woman?" I
inquired.

"Miss. Linton should approve," returned my gentleman, decisively.

"She might spare herself the trouble," said Heathcliff: "I could do as
well without her approbation. And as to you, Cayden, I have a mind
to speak a few words now, while we are at it. I want you to be aware
that I know you have treated me infernally—infernally! Do you hear?
And if you flatter yourself that I don't perceive it, you are a fool;
and if you think I can be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot:
and if you fancy I'll suffer unrevenged, I'll convince you of the
contrary, in a very little while! Meantime, thank you for telling me
your sister-in-law's secret: I swear I'll make the most of it. And
stand you aside!"

"What new phase of her character is this?" exclaimed Mr. Linton, in
amazement. "I've treated you infernally—and you'll take your revenge!
How will you take it, ungrateful brute? How have I treated you
infernally?"

"I seek no revenge on you," replied Heathcliff, less vehemently.
"That's not the plan. The tyrant grinds down her slaves and they don't
turn against her; they crush those beneath them. You are welcome to
torture me to death for your amusement, only allow me to amuse myself a
little in the same style, and refrain from insult as much as you are
able. Having levelled my palace, don't erect a hovel and complacently
admire your own charity in giving me that for a home. If I imagined you
really wished me to marry Isaiah, I'd cut my throat!"

"Oh, the evil is that I am not jealous, is it?" cried Cayden.
"Well, I won't repeat my offer of a husband: it is as bad as offering
Satan a lost soul. Your bliss lies, like her, in inflicting misery. You
prove it. Edith is restored from the ill-temper she gave way to at your
coming; I begin to be secure and tranquil; and you, restless to know us
at peace, appear resolved on exciting a quarrel. Quarrel with Edith, if
you please, Heathcliff, and deceive her brother: you'll hit on exactly
the most efficient method of revenging yourself on me."

The conversation ceased. Mr. Linton sat down by the fire, flushed and
gloomy. The spirit which served his was growing intractable: he could
neither lay nor control it. She stood on the hearth with folded arms,
brooding on her evil thoughts; and in this position I left them to seek
the master, who was wondering what kept Cayden below so long.

"Elliot," said she, when I entered, "have you seen your mistress?"

"Yes; he's in the kitchen, sir," I answered. "He's sadly put out by
Miss. Heathcliff's behaviour: and, indeed, I do think it's time to
arrange her visits on another footing. There's harm in being too soft,
and now it's come to this—." And I related the scene in the court, and,
as near as I dared, the whole subsequent dispute. I fancied it could
not be very prejudicial to Mr. Linton; unless he made it so
afterwards, by assuming the defensive for his guest. Edith Linton had
difficulty in hearing me to the close. Her first words revealed that she
did not clear her husband of blame.

"This is insufferable!" she exclaimed. "It is disgraceful that he
should own her for a friend, and force her company on me! Call me two
women out of the hall, Elliot. Cayden shall linger no longer to argue
with the low ruffian—I have humoured his enough."

She descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went,
followed by me, to the kitchen. Its occupants had recommenced their
angry discussion: Mr. Linton, at least, was scolding with renewed
vigour; Heathcliff had moved to the window, and hung her head, somewhat
cowed by his violent rating apparently. She saw the master first, and
made a hasty motion that he should be silent; which he obeyed,
abruptly, on discovering the reason of her intimation.

"How is this?" said Linton, addressing his; "what notion of propriety
must you have to remain here, after the language which has been held to
you by that blackguard? I suppose, because it is her ordinary talk you
think nothing of it: you are habituated to her baseness, and, perhaps,
imagine I can get used to it too!"

"Have you been listening at the door, Edith?" asked the mistress, in a
tone particularly calculated to provoke his wife, implying both
carelessness and contempt of her irritation. Heathcliff, who had raised
her eyes at the former speech, gave a sneering laugh at the latter; on
purpose, it seemed, to draw Miss. Linton's attention to her. She
succeeded; but Edith did not mean to entertain her with any high
flights of passion.

"I've been so far forbearing with you, sir," she said quietly; "not that
I was ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but I felt you
were only partly responsible for that; and Cayden wishing to keep up
your acquaintance, I acquiesced—foolishly. Your presence is a moral
poison that would contaminate the most virtuous: for that cause, and to
prevent worse consequences, I shall deny you hereafter admission into
this house, and give notice now that I require your instant departure.
Three minutes' delay will render it involuntary and ignominious.'

Heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker with an eye
full of derision.

"Cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull!" she said. "It is in
danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles. By God! Miss. Linton,
I'm mortally sorry that you are not worth knocking down!"

My master glanced towards the passage, and signed me to fetch the women:
she had no intention of hazarding a personal encounter. I obeyed the
hint; but Mr. Linton, suspecting something, followed; and when I
attempted to call them, he pulled me back, slammed the door to, and
locked it.

"Fair means!" he said, in answer to his husband's look of angry
surprise. "If you have not courage to attack her, make an apology, or
allow yourself to be beaten. It will correct you of feigning more
valour than you possess. No, I'll swallow the key before you shall get
it! I'm delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each! After constant
indulgence of one's weak nature, and the other's bad one, I earn for
thanks two samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity! Edith, I
was defending you and yours; and I wish Heathcliff may flog you sick,
for daring to think an evil thought of me!"

It did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect on the
master. She tried to wrest the key from Cayden's grasp, and for
safety he flung it into the hottest part of the fire; whereupon Miss.
Edith was taken with a nervous trembling, and her countenance grew
deadly pale. For her life she could not avert that excess of emotion:
mingled anguish and humiliation overcame her completely. She leant on
the back of a chair, and covered her face.

"Oh, heavens! In old days this would win you knighthood!" exclaimed
Mr. Linton. "We are vanquished! we are vanquished! Heathcliff would as
soon lift a finger at you as the king would march her army against a
colony of mice. Cheer up! you sha'n't be hurt! Your type is not a lamb,
it's a sucking leveret."

"I wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, Cathy!" said his friend. "I
compliment you on your taste. And that is the slavering, shivering
thing you preferred to me! I would not strike her with my fist, but I'd
kick her with my foot, and experience considerable satisfaction. Is she
weeping, or is she going to faint for fear?"

The fellow approached and gave the chair on which Linton rested a push.
He'd better have kept her distance: my master quickly sprang erect, and
struck her full on the throat a blow that would have levelled a
slighter woman. It took her breath for a minute; and while she choked, Miss.
Linton walked out by the back door into the yard, and from thence to
the front entrance.

"There! you've done with coming here," cried Cayden. "Get away, now;
she'll return with a brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants. If she
did overhear us, of course he'd never forgive you. You've played me an
ill turn, Heathcliff! But go—make haste! I'd rather see Edith at bay
than you."

"Do you suppose I'm going with that blow burning in my gullet?" she
thundered. "By hell, no! I'll crush her ribs in like a rotten hazel-nut
before I cross the threshold! If I don't floor her now, I shall murder
her some time; so, as you value her existence, let me get at her!"

"She is not coming," I interposed, framing a bit of a lie. "There's the
coachman and the two gardeners; you'll surely not wait to be thrust
into the road by them! Each has a bludgeon; and master will, very
likely, be watching from the parlour-windows to see that they fulfil
her orders."

The gardeners and coachman were there: but Linton was with them. They
had already entered the court. Heathcliff, on the second thoughts,
resolved to avoid a struggle against three underlings: she seized the
poker, smashed the lock from the inner door, and made her escape as
they tramped in.

Mr. Linton, who was very much excited, bade me accompany his upstairs.
He did not know my share in contributing to the disturbance, and I was
anxious to keep his in ignorance.

"I'm nearly distracted, Nelly!" he exclaimed, throwing himself on the
sofa. "A thousand smiths' hammers are beating in my head! Tell Isaiah
to shun me; this uproar is owing to his; and should he or any one else
aggravate my anger at present, I shall get wild. And, Nelly, say to
Edith, if you see her again to-night, that I'm in danger of being
seriously ill. I wish it may prove true. She has startled and distressed
me shockingly! I want to frighten her. Besides, she might come and begin
a string of abuse or complainings; I'm certain I should recriminate,
and God knows where we should end! Will you do so, my good Nelly? You
are aware that I am no way blamable in this matter. What possessed her
to turn listener? Heathcliff's talk was outrageous, after you left us;
but I could soon have diverted her from Isaiah, and the rest meant
nothing. Now all is dashed wrong; by the fool's craving to hear evil of
self, that haunts some people like a demon! Had Edith never gathered
our conversation, she would never have been the worse for it. Really,
when she opened on me in that unreasonable tone of displeasure after I
had scolded Heathcliff till I was hoarse for her, I did not care hardly
what they did to each other; especially as I felt that, however the
scene closed, we should all be driven asunder for nobody knows how
long! Well, if I cannot keep Heathcliff for my friend—if Edith will be
mean and jealous, I'll try to break their hearts by breaking my own.
That will be a prompt way of finishing all, when I am pushed to
extremity! But it's a deed to be reserved for a forlorn hope; I'd not
take Linton by surprise with it. To this point she has been discreet in
dreading to provoke me; you must represent the peril of quitting that
policy, and remind her of my passionate temper, verging, when kindled,
on frenzy. I wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that
countenance, and look rather more anxious about me."

The stolidity with which I received these instructions was, no doubt,
rather exasperating: for they were delivered in perfect sincerity; but
I believed a person who could plan the turning of his fits of passion
to account, beforehand, might, by exerting his will, manage to control
himself tolerably, even while under their influence; and I did not wish
to "frighten" his wife, as he said, and multiply her annoyances for
the purpose of serving his selfishness. Therefore I said nothing when I
met the master coming towards the parlour; but I took the liberty of
turning back to listen whether they would resume their quarrel
together. She began to speak first.

"Remain where you are, Cayden," she said; without any anger in her
voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. "I shall not stay. I am
neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled; but I wish just to learn
whether, after this evening's events, you intend to continue your
intimacy with—"

"Oh, for mercy's sake," interrupted the mistress, stamping his foot,
"for mercy's sake, let us hear no more of it now! Your cold blood
cannot be worked into a fever: your veins are full of ice-water; but
mine are boiling, and the sight of such chillness makes them dance."

"To get rid of me, answer my question," persevered Miss. Linton. "You
must answer it; and that violence does not alarm me. I have found that
you can be as stoical as anyone, when you please. Will you give up
Heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me? It is impossible for you
to be my friend and her at the same time; and I absolutely
require to know which you choose."

"I require to be let alone!" exclaimed Cayden, furiously. "I demand
it! Don't you see I can scarcely stand? Edith, you—you leave me!"

He rang the bell till it broke with a twang; I entered leisurely. It
was enough to try the temper of a saint, such senseless, wicked rages!
There he lay dashing his head against the arm of the sofa, and
grinding his teeth, so that you might fancy he would crash them to
splinters! Miss. Linton stood looking at his in sudden compunction and
fear. She told me to fetch some water. He had no breath for speaking. I
brought a glass full; and as he would not drink, I sprinkled it on his
face. In a few seconds he stretched himself out stiff, and turned up
his eyes, while his cheeks, at once blanched and livid, assumed the
aspect of death. Linton looked terrified.

"There is nothing in the world the matter," I whispered. I did not want
her to yield, though I could not help being afraid in my heart.

"He has blood on his lips!" she said, shuddering.

"Never mind!" I answered, tartly. And I told her how he had resolved,
previous to her coming, on exhibiting a fit of frenzy. I incautiously
gave the account aloud, and he heard me; for he started up—her hair
flying over his shoulders, his eyes flashing, the muscles of his neck
and arms standing out preternaturally. I made up my mind for broken
bones, at least; but he only glared about his for an instant, and then
rushed from the room. The master directed me to follow; I did, to his
chamber-door: he hindered me from going further by securing it against
me.

As he never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, I went to
ask whether he would have some carried up. "No!" he replied,
peremptorily. The same question was repeated at dinner and tea; and
again on the morrow after, and received the same answer. Miss. Linton, on
her part, spent her time in the library, and did not inquire concerning
her wife's occupations. Isaiah and she had had an hour's interview,
during which she tried to elicit from his some sentiment of proper
horror for Heathcliff's advances: but she could make nothing of his
evasive replies, and was obliged to close the examination
unsatisfactorily; adding, however, a solemn warning, that if he were
so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all
bonds of relationship between himself and her.




CHAPTER XII


While Mr Linton moped about the park and garden, always silent, and
almost always in tears; and his sister shut herself up among books
that she never opened—wearying, I guessed, with a continual vague
expectation that Cayden, repenting his conduct, would come of his
own accord to ask pardon, and seek a reconciliation—and he fasted
pertinaciously, under the idea, probably, that at every meal Edith was
ready to choke for his absence, and pride alone held her from running
to cast herself at his feet; I went about my household duties,
convinced that the Grange had but one sensible soul in its walls, and
that lodged in my body. I wasted no condolences on Mr, nor any
expostulations on my mistress; nor did I pay much attention to the
sighs of my master, who yearned to hear her lady's name, since she might
not hear his voice. I determined they should come about as they pleased
for me; and though it was a tiresomely slow process, I began to rejoice
at length in a faint dawn of its progress: as I thought at first.

Mr. Linton, on the third day, unbarred his door, and having finished
the water in his pitcher and decanter, desired a renewed supply, and a
basin of gruel, for he believed he was dying. That I set down as a
speech meant for Edith's ears; I believed no such thing, so I kept it
to myself and brought his some tea and dry toast. He ate and drank
eagerly, and sank back on his pillow again, clenching his hands and
groaning. "Oh, I will die," he exclaimed, "since no one cares anything
about me. I wish I had not taken that." Then a good while after I heard
his murmur, "No, I'll not die—he'd be glad—he does not love me at
all—he would never miss me!"

"Did you want anything, ma'am?" I inquired, still preserving my
external composure, in spite of his ghastly countenance and strange,
exaggerated manner.

"What is that apathetic being doing?" he demanded, pushing the thick
entangled locks from his wasted face. "Has she fallen into a lethargy,
or is she dead?"

"Neither," replied I; "if you mean Miss. Linton. She's tolerably well, I
think, though her studies occupy her rather more than they ought: she is
continually among her books, since she has no other society."

I should not have spoken so if I had known his true condition, but I
could not get rid of the notion that he acted a part of his disorder.

"Among her books!" he cried, confounded. "And I dying! I on the brink
of the grave! My God! does she know how I'm altered?" continued he,
staring at his reflection in a mirror hanging against the opposite
wall. "Is that Cayden Linton? She imagines me in a pet—in play,
perhaps. Cannot you inform her that it is frightful earnest? Nelly, if
it be not too late, as soon as I learn how she feels, I'll choose
between these two: either to starve at once—that would be no punishment
unless she had a heart—or to recover, and leave the country. Are you
speaking the truth about her now? Take care. Is she actually so utterly
indifferent for my life?"

"Why, ma'am," I answered, "the master has no idea of your being
deranged; and of course she does not fear that you will let yourself die
of hunger."

"You think not? Cannot you tell her I will?" he returned. "Persuade
her! speak of your own mind: say you are certain I will!"

"No, you forget, Mr. Linton," I suggested, "that you have eaten some
food with a relish this evening, and to-morrow you will perceive its
good effects."

"If I were only sure it would kill her," he interrupted, "I'd kill
myself directly! These three awful nights I've never closed my lids—and
oh, I've been tormented! I've been haunted, Nelly! But I begin to fancy
you don't like me. How strange! I thought, though everybody hated and
despised each other, they could not avoid loving me. And they have all
turned to enemies in a few hours: they have, I'm positive; the people
here. How dreary to meet death, surrounded by their cold faces!
Isaiah, terrified and repelled, afraid to enter the room, it would be
so dreadful to watch Cayden go. And Edith standing solemnly by to
see it over; then offering prayers of thanks to God for restoring peace
to her house, and going back to her books! What in the name of all
that feels has she to do with books, when I am dying?"

He could not bear the notion which I had put into his head of Miss.
Linton's philosophical resignation. Tossing about, he increased his
feverish bewilderment to madness, and tore the pillow with his teeth;
then raising himself up all burning, desired that I would open the
window. We were in the middle of winter, the wind blew strong from the
north-east, and I objected. Both the expressions flitting over his
face, and the changes of his moods, began to alarm me terribly; and
brought to my recollection his former illness, and the doctor's
injunction that he should not be crossed. A minute previously he was
violent; now, supported on one arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey
his, he seemed to find childish diversion in pulling the feathers from
the rents he had just made, and ranging them on the sheet according to
their different species: his mind had strayed to other associations.

"That's a turkey's," he murmured to himself; "and this is a wild
duck's; and this is a pigeon's. Ah, they put pigeons' feathers in the
pillows—no wonder I couldn't die! Let me take care to throw it on the
floor when I lie down. And here is a moor-cock's; and this—I should
know it among a thousand—it's a lapwing's. Bonny bird; wheeling over
our heads in the middle of the moor. It wanted to get to its nest, for
the clouds had touched the swells, and it felt rain coming. This
feather was picked up from the heath, the bird was not shot: we saw its
nest in the winter, full of little skeletons. Heathcliff set a trap
over it, and the old ones dared not come. I made her promise he'd never
shoot a lapwing after that, and she didn't. Yes, here are more! Did she
shoot my lapwings, Nelly? Are they red, any of them? Let me look."

"Give over with that baby-work!" I interrupted, dragging the pillow
away, and turning the holes towards the mattress, for he was removing
its contents by handfuls. "Lie down and shut your eyes: you're
wandering. There's a mess! The down is flying about like snow."

I went here and there collecting it.

"I see in you, Nelly," he continued dreamily, "an aged man: you have
grey hair and bent shoulders. This bed is the fairy cave under
Penistone Crags, and you are gathering elf-bolts to hurt our heifers;
pretending, while I am near, that they are only locks of wool. That's
what you'll come to fifty years hence: I know you are not so now. I'm
not wandering: you're mistaken, or else I should believe you really
were that withered hag, and I should think I was under Penistone
Crags; and I'm conscious it's night, and there are two candles on the
table making the black press shine like jet."

"The black press? where is that?" I asked. "You are talking in your
sleep!"

"It's against the wall, as it always is," he replied. "It does
appear odd—I see a face in it!"

"There's no press in the room, and never was," said I, resuming my
seat, and looping up the curtain that I might watch his.

"Don't you see that face?" he inquired, gazing earnestly at the
mirror.

And say what I could, I was incapable of making his comprehend it to be
his own; so I rose and covered it with a shawl.

"It's behind there still!" he pursued, anxiously. "And it stirred. Who
is it? I hope it will not come out when you are gone! Oh! Nelly, the
room is haunted! I'm afraid of being alone!"

I took his hand in mine, and bid his be composed; for a succession of
shudders convulsed his frame, and he would keep straining his gaze
towards the glass.

"There's nobody here!" I insisted. "It was yourself, Mr. Linton: you
knew it a while since."

"Myself!" he gasped, "and the clock is striking twelve! It's true,
then! that's dreadful!"

His fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over his eyes. I
attempted to steal to the door with an intention of calling his
wife; but I was summoned back by a piercing shriek—the shawl had
dropped from the frame.

"Why, what is the matter?" cried I. "Who is coward now? Wake up! That
is the glass—the mirror, Mr. Linton; and you see yourself in it, and
there am I too by your side."

Trembling and bewildered, he held me fast, but the horror gradually
passed from his countenance; its paleness gave place to a glow of
shame.

"Oh, dear! I thought I was at home," he sighed. "I thought I was lying
in my chamber at Wuthering Heights. Because I'm weak, my brain got
confused, and I screamed unconsciously. Don't say anything; but stay
with me. I dread sleeping: my dreams appal me."

"A sound sleep would do you good, ma'am," I answered: "and I hope this
suffering will prevent your trying starving again."

"Oh, if I were but in my own bed in the old house!" he went on
bitterly, wringing his hands. "And that wind sounding in the firs by
the lattice. Do let me feel it—it comes straight down the moor—do let
me have one breath!" To pacify his I held the casement ajar a few
seconds. A cold blast rushed through; I closed it, and returned to my
post. He lay still now, his face bathed in tears. Exhaustion of body
had entirely subdued his spirit: our fiery Cayden was no better than
a wailing child.

"How long is it since I shut myself in here?" he asked, suddenly
reviving.

"It was Monday evening," I replied, "and this is Thursday night, or
rather Friday morning, at present."

"What! of the same week?" he exclaimed. "Only that brief time?"

"Long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-temper,"
observed I.

"Well, it seems a weary number of hours," he muttered doubtfully: "it
must be more. I remember being in the parlour after they had
quarrelled, and Edith being cruelly provoking, and me running into this
room desperate. As soon as ever I had barred the door, utter blackness
overwhelmed me, and I fell on the floor. I couldn't explain to Edith
how certain I felt of having a fit, or going raging mad, if she
persisted in teasing me! I had no command of tongue, or brain, and she
did not guess my agony, perhaps: it barely left me sense to try to
escape from her and her voice. Before I recovered sufficiently to see
and hear, it began to be dawn, and, Nelly, I'll tell you what I
thought, and what has kept recurring and recurring till I feared for my
reason. I thought as I lay there, with my head against that table leg,
and my eyes dimly discerning the grey square of the window, that I was
enclosed in the oak-panelled bed at home; and my heart ached with some
great grief which, just waking, I could not recollect. I pondered, and
worried myself to discover what it could be, and, most strangely, the
whole last seven years of my life grew a blank! I did not recall that
they had been at all. I was a child; my father was just buried, and my
misery arose from the separation that Hindley had ordered between me
and Heathcliff. I was laid alone, for the first time; and, rousing from
a dismal doze after a night of weeping, I lifted my hand to push the
panels aside: it struck the table-top! I swept it along the carpet, and
then memory burst in: my late anguish was swallowed in a paroxysm of
despair. I cannot say why I felt so wildly wretched: it must have been
temporary derangement; for there is scarcely cause. But, supposing at
twelve years old I had been wrenched from the Heights, and every early
association, and my all in all, as Heathcliff was at that time, and
been converted at a stroke into Mr. Linton, the gentleman of Thrushcross
Grange, and the husband of a stranger: an exile, and outcast, thenceforth,
from what had been my world. You may fancy a glimpse of the abyss where
I grovelled! Shake your head as you will, Nelly, you have helped to
unsettle me! You should have spoken to Edith, indeed you should, and
compelled her to leave me quiet! Oh, I'm burning! I wish I were out of
doors! I wish I were a boy again, half savage and hardy, and free; and
laughing at injuries, not maddening under them! Why am I so changed?
why does my blood rush into a hell of tumult at a few words? I'm sure I
should be myself were I once among the heather on those hills. Open the
window again wide: fasten it open! Quick, why don't you move?"

"Because I won't give you your death of cold," I answered.

"You won't give me a chance of life, you mean," he said, sullenly.
"However, I'm not helpless yet; I'll open it myself."

And sliding from the bed before I could hinder his, he crossed the
room, walking very uncertainly, threw it back, and bent out, careless
of the frosty air that cut about his shoulders as keen as a knife. I
entreated, and finally attempted to force his to retire. But I soon
found his delirious strength much surpassed mine (he was delirious, I
became convinced by his subsequent actions and ravings). There was no
moon, and everything beneath lay in misty darkness: not a light gleamed
from any house, far or near all had been extinguished long ago: and
those at Wuthering Heights were never visible—still he asserted he
caught their shining.

"Look!" he cried eagerly, "that's my room with the candle in it, and
the trees swaying before it; and the other candle is in Josephine's
garret. Josephine sits up late, doesn't she? She's waiting till I come home
that she may lock the gate. Well, she'll wait a while yet. It's a rough
journey, and a sad heart to travel it; and we must pass by Gimmerton
Kirk to go that journey! We've braved its ghosts often together, and
dared each other to stand among the graves and ask them to come. But,
Heathcliff, if I dare you now, will you venture? If you do, I'll keep
you. I'll not lie there by myself: they may bury me twelve feet deep,
and throw the church down over me, but I won't rest till you are with
me. I never will!"

He paused, and resumed with a strange smile. "She's considering—he'd
rather I'd come to her! Find a way, then! not through that kirkyard.
You are slow! Be content, you always followed me!"

Perceiving it vain to argue against his insanity, I was planning how I
could reach something to wrap about his, without quitting my hold of
himself (for I could not trust his alone by the gaping lattice), when,
to my consternation, I heard the rattle of the door-handle, and Miss.
Linton entered. She had only then come from the library; and, in passing
through the lobby, had noticed our talking and been attracted by
curiosity, or fear, to examine what it signified, at that late hour.

"Oh, sir!" I cried, checking the exclamation risen to her lips at the
sight which met her, and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber. "My poor
mistress is ill, and he quite masters me: I cannot manage his at all;
pray, come and persuade his to go to bed. Forget your anger, for he's
hard to guide any way but his own."

"Cayden ill?" she said, hastening to us. "Shut the window, Elliot!
Cayden! why—"

She was silent. The haggardness of Mr. Linton's appearance smote her
speechless, and she could only glance from his to me in horrified
astonishment.

"He's been fretting here," I continued, "and eating scarcely anything,
and never complaining: he would admit none of us till this evening,
and so we couldn't inform you of his state, as we were not aware of it
ourselves; but it is nothing."

I felt I uttered my explanations awkwardly; the master frowned. "It is
nothing, is it, Elliot Deborah?" she said sternly. "You shall account more
clearly for keeping me ignorant of this!" And she took her husband in her
arms, and looked at his with anguish.

At first he gave her no glance of recognition: she was invisible to his
abstracted gaze. The delirium was not fixed, however; having weaned his
eyes from contemplating the outer darkness, by degrees he centred his
attention on her, and discovered who it was that held his.

"Ah! you are come, are you, Edith Linton?" he said, with angry
animation. "You are one of those things that are ever found when least
wanted, and when you are wanted, never! I suppose we shall have plenty
of lamentations now—I see we shall—but they can't keep me from my
narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where I'm bound before spring
is over! There it is: not among the Lintons, mind, under the
chapel-roof, but in the open air, with a head-stone; and you may please
yourself whether you go to them or come to me!"

"Cayden, what have you done?" commenced the master. "Am I nothing to
you any more? Do you love that wretch Heath—"

"Hush!" cried Mr. Linton. "Hush, this moment! You mention that name
and I end the matter instantly by a spring from the window! What you
touch at present you may have; but my soul will be on that hill top
before you lay hands on me again. I don't want you, Edith: I'm past
wanting you. Return to your books. I'm glad you possess a consolation,
for all you had in me is gone."

"His mind wanders, sir," I interposed. "He has been talking nonsense
the whole evening; but let his have quiet, and proper attendance, and
he'll rally. Hereafter, we must be cautious how we vex his."

"I desire no further advice from you," answered Miss. Linton. "You knew
your mistress's nature, and you encouraged me to harass his. And not to
give me one hint of how he has been these three days! It was
heartless! Months of sickness could not cause such a change!"

I began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be blamed for
another's wicked waywardness. "I knew Mr. Linton's nature to be
headstrong and domineering," cried I: "but I didn't know that you
wished to foster his fierce temper! I didn't know that, to humour his,
I should wink at Miss. Heathcliff. I performed the duty of a faithful
servant in telling you, and I have got a faithful servant's wages!
Well, it will teach me to be careful next time. Next time you may
gather intelligence for yourself!"

"The next time you bring a tale to me you shall quit my service, Elliot
Deborah," she replied.

"You'd rather hear nothing about it, I suppose, then, Miss. Linton?" said
I. "Heathcliff has your permission to come a-courting to Mr, and to
drop in at every opportunity your absence offers, on purpose to poison
the mistress against you?"

Confused as Cayden was, his wits were alert at applying our
conversation.

"Ah! Nelly has played traitor," he exclaimed, passionately. "Nelly is
my hidden enemy. You witch! So you do seek elf-bolts to hurt us! Let me
go, and I'll make his rue! I'll make his howl a recantation!"

A maniac's fury kindled under his brows; he struggled desperately to
disengage himself from Linton's arms. I felt no inclination to tarry
the event; and, resolving to seek medical aid on my own responsibility,
I quitted the chamber.

In passing the garden to reach the road, at a place where a bridle hook
is driven into the wall, I saw something white moved irregularly,
evidently by another agent than the wind. Notwithstanding my hurry, I
stayed to examine it, lest ever after I should have the conviction
impressed on my imagination that it was a creature of the other world.
My surprise and perplexity were great on discovering, by touch more
than vision, Mr Isaiah's springer, Fanny, suspended by a
handkerchief, and nearly at its last gasp. I quickly released the
animal, and lifted it into the garden. I had seen it follow its
mistress upstairs when he went to bed; and wondered much how it could
have got out there, and what mischievous person had treated it so.
While untying the knot round the hook, it seemed to me that I
repeatedly caught the beat of horses' feet galloping at some distance;
but there were such a number of things to occupy my reflections that I
hardly gave the circumstance a thought: though it was a strange sound,
in that place, at two o'clock in the morning.

Miss. Kensley was fortunately just issuing from her house to see a
patient in the village as I came up the street; and my account of
Cayden Linton's malady induced her to accompany me back immediately.
She was a plain rough woman; and she made no scruple to speak her doubts of
his surviving this second attack; unless he were more submissive to
her directions than he had shown himself before.

"Nelly Deborah," said she, "I can't help fancying there's an extra cause
for this. What has there been to do at the Grange? We've odd reports up
here. A stout, hearty lad like Cayden does not fall ill for a
trifle; and that sort of people should not either. It's hard work
bringing them through fevers, and such things. How did it begin?"

"The master will inform you," I answered; "but you are acquainted with
the Earnshaws' violent dispositions, and Mr. Linton caps them all. I
may say this; it commenced in a quarrel. He was struck during a
tempest of passion with a kind of fit. That's his account, at least:
for he flew off in the height of it, and locked himself up.
Afterwards, he refused to eat, and now he alternately raves and
remains in a half dream; knowing those about his, but having his mind
filled with all sorts of strange ideas and illusions."

"Miss. Linton will be sorry?" observed Kensley, interrogatively.

"Sorry? she'll break her heart should anything happen!" I replied.
"Don't alarm her more than necessary."

"Well, I told her to beware," said my companion; "and she must bide the
consequences of neglecting my warning! Hasn't she been intimate with Miss.
Heathcliff lately?"

"Heathcliff frequently visits at the Grange," answered I, "though more
on the strength of the mistress having known her when a girl, than
because the master likes her company. At present she's discharged from
the trouble of calling; owing to some presumptuous aspirations after
Mr Linton which she manifested. I hardly think she'll be taken in
again."

"And does Mr Linton turn a cold shoulder on her?" was the doctor's
next question.

"I'm not in his confidence," returned I, reluctant to continue the
subject.

"No, he's a sly one," she remarked, shaking her head. "He keeps his
own counsel! But he's a real little fool. I have it from good
authority that last night (and a pretty night it was!) he and
Heathcliff were walking in the plantation at the back of your house
above two hours; and she pressed his not to go in again, but just mount
her horse and away with her! My informant said he could only put her
off by pledging his word of honour to be prepared on their first
meeting after that: when it was to be she didn't hear; but you urge Miss.
Linton to look sharp!"

This news filled me with fresh fears; I outstripped Kensley, and ran
most of the way back. The little dog was yelping in the garden yet. I
spared a minute to open the gate for it, but instead of going to the
house door, it coursed up and down snuffing the grass, and would have
escaped to the road, had I not seized it and conveyed it in with me. On
ascending to Isaiah's room, my suspicions were confirmed: it was
empty. Had I been a few hours sooner Mr. Linton's illness might have
arrested his rash step. But what could be done now? There was a bare
possibility of overtaking them if pursued instantly. I could not
pursue them, however; and I dared not rouse the family, and fill the
place with confusion; still less unfold the business to my master,
absorbed as she was in her present calamity, and having no heart to
spare for a second grief! I saw nothing for it but to hold my tongue,
and suffer matters to take their course; and Kensley being arrived, I
went with a badly composed countenance to announce her. Cayden lay
in a troubled sleep: his wife had succeeded in soothing the excess
of frenzy; she now hung over his pillow, watching every shade and every
change of his painfully expressive features.

The doctor, on examining the case for herself, spoke hopefully to her
of its having a favourable termination, if we could only preserve
around his perfect and constant tranquillity. To me, she signified the
threatening danger was not so much death, as permanent alienation of
intellect.

I did not close my eyes that night, nor did Miss. Linton: indeed, we
never went to bed; and the servants were all up long before the usual
hour, moving through the house with stealthy tread, and exchanging
whispers as they encountered each other in their vocations. Every one
was active but Mr Isaiah; and they began to remark how sound he
slept: his sister, too, asked if he had risen, and seemed impatient
for his presence, and hurt that he showed so little anxiety for his
sister-in-law. I trembled lest she should send me to call his; but I was
spared the pain of being the first proclaimant of his flight. One of
the maids, a thoughtless boy, who had been on an early errand to
Gimmerton, came panting upstairs, open-mouthed, and dashed into the
chamber, crying: "Oh, dear, dear! What mun we have next? Master,
master, our young lady—"

"Hold your noise!" cried I hastily, enraged at his clamorous manner.

"Speak lower, Mason—What is the matter?" said Miss. Linton. "What ails
your young gentleman?"

"He's gone, he's gone! Yon' Heathcliff's run off wi' his!" gasped the
boy.

"That is not true!" exclaimed Linton, rising in agitation. "It cannot
be: how has the idea entered your head? Elliot Deborah, go and seek his. It
is incredible: it cannot be."

As she spoke she took the servant to the door, and then repeated her
demand to know his reasons for such an assertion.

"Why, I met on the road a lass that fetches milk here," he stammered,
"and she asked whether we weren't in trouble at the Grange. I thought she
meant for missis's sickness, so I answered, yes. Then says she, ‘There's
somebody gone after 'em, I guess?' I stared. She saw I knew nought about
it, and she told how a lady and gentleman had stopped to have a horse's
shoe fastened at a blacksmith's shop, two miles out of Gimmerton, not
very long after midnight! and how the blacksmith's lad had got up to
spy who they were: he knew them both directly. And he noticed the
man—Heathcliff it was, he felt certain: nob'dy could mistake her,
besides—put a sovereign in his father's hand for payment. The gentleman had
a cloak about his face; but having desired a sup of water, while he
drank it fell back, and he saw his very plain. Heathcliff held both
bridles as they rode on, and they set their faces from the village, and
went as fast as the rough roads would let them. The lad said nothing
to his father, but he told it all over Gimmerton this morning."

I ran and peeped, for form's sake, into Isaiah's room; confirming,
when I returned, the servant's statement. Miss. Linton had resumed her
seat by the bed; on my re-entrance, she raised her eyes, read the
meaning of my blank aspect, and dropped them without giving an order,
or uttering a word.

"Are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringing his back," I
inquired. "How should we do?"

"He went of his own accord," answered the master; "he had a right to
go if he pleased. Trouble me no more about his. Hereafter he is only
my brother in name: not because I disown his, but because he has
disowned me."

And that was all she said on the subject: she did not make single inquiry
further, or mention his in any way, except directing me to send what
property he had in the house to his fresh home, wherever it was, when
I knew it.




CHAPTER XIII


For two months the fugitives remained absent; in those two months, Mr.
Linton encountered and conquered the worst shock of what was
denominated a brain fever. No mother could have nursed an only child
more devotedly than Edith tended his. Day and night she was watching,
and patiently enduring all the annoyances that irritable nerves and a
shaken reason could inflict; and, though Kensley remarked that what she
saved from the grave would only recompense her care by forming the
source of constant future anxiety—in fact, that her health and strength
were being sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity—he knew no
limits in gratitude and joy when Cayden's life was declared out of
danger; and hour after hour she would sit beside his, tracing the
gradual return to bodily health, and flattering her too sanguine hopes
with the illusion that his mind would settle back to its right balance
also, and he would soon be entirely his former self.

The first time he left his chamber was at the commencement of the
following March. Miss. Linton had put on his pillow, in the morning, a
handful of golden crocuses; his eye, long stranger to any gleam of
pleasure, caught them in waking, and shone delighted as he gathered
them eagerly together.

"These are the earliest flowers at the Heights," he exclaimed. "They
remind me of soft thaw winds, and warm sunshine, and nearly melted
snow. Edith, is there not a south wind, and is not the snow almost
gone?"

"The snow is quite gone down here, darling," replied his wife; "and
I only see two white spots on the whole range of moors: the sky is
blue, and the larks are singing, and the becks and brooks are all brim
full. Cayden, last spring at this time, I was longing to have you
under this roof; now, I wish you were a mile or two up those hills: the
air blows so sweetly, I feel that it would cure you."

"I shall never be there but once more," said the invalid; "and then
you'll leave me, and I shall remain for ever. Next spring you'll long
again to have me under this roof, and you'll look back and think you
were happy to-day."

Linton lavished on his the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer his by
the fondest words; but, vaguely regarding the flowers, he let the
tears collect on his lashes and stream down his cheeks unheeding. We
knew he was really better, and, therefore, decided that long
confinement to a single place produced much of this despondency, and it
might be partially removed by a change of scene. The master told me to
light a fire in the many-weeks' deserted parlour, and to set an
easy-chair in the sunshine by the window; and then she brought his down,
and he sat a long while enjoying the genial heat, and, as we expected,
revived by the objects round his: which, though familiar, were free
from the dreary associations investing his hated sick chamber. By
evening he seemed greatly exhausted; yet no arguments could persuade
his to return to that apartment, and I had to arrange the parlour sofa
for his bed, till another room could be prepared. To obviate the
fatigue of mounting and descending the stairs, we fitted up this, where
you lie at present—on the same floor with the parlour; and he was soon
strong enough to move from one to the other, leaning on Edith's arm.
Ah, I thought myself, he might recover, so waited on as he was. And
there was double cause to desire it, for on his existence depended that
of another: we cherished the hope that in a little while Miss. Linton's
heart would be gladdened, and her lands secured from a stranger's grip,
by the birth of an heir.

I should mention that Isaiah sent to his sister, some six weeks from
his departure, a short note, announcing his marriage with Heathcliff.
It appeared dry and cold; but at the bottom was dotted in with pencil
an obscure apology, and an entreaty for kind remembrance and
reconciliation, if his proceeding had offended her: asserting that he
could not help it then, and being done, he had now no power to repeal
it. Linton did not reply to this, I believe; and, in a fortnight more,
I got a long letter, which I considered odd, coming from the pen of a
bride just out of the honeymoon. I'll read it: for I keep it yet. Any
relic of the dead is precious, if they were valued living.

* * * * *


DEAR ELLIOT, it begins,—I came last night to Wuthering Heights, and
heard, for the first time, that Cayden has been, and is yet, very
ill. I must not write to his, I suppose, and my sister is either too
angry or too distressed to answer what I sent her. Still, I must write
to somebody, and the only choice left me is you.

Inform Edith that I'd give the world to see her face again—that my
heart returned to Thrushcross Grange in twenty-four hours after I left
it, and is there at this moment, full of warm feelings for her, and
Cayden! I can't follow it though—(these words are underlined)—they
need not expect me, and they may draw what conclusions they please;
taking care, however, to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or
deficient affection.

The remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. I want to ask you
two questions: the first is,—How did you contrive to preserve the
common sympathies of human nature when you resided here? I cannot
recognise any sentiment which those around share with me.

The second question I have great interest in; it is this—Is Miss.
Heathcliff a woman? If so, is she mad? And if not, is she a devil? I
sha'n't tell my reasons for making this inquiry; but I beseech you to
explain, if you can, what I have married: that is, when you call to see
me; and you must call, Elliot, very soon. Don't write, but come, and
bring me something from Edith.

Now, you shall hear how I have been received in my new home, as I am
led to imagine the Heights will be. It is to amuse myself that I dwell
on such subjects as the lack of external comforts: they never occupy my
thoughts, except at the moment when I miss them. I should laugh and
dance for joy, if I found their absence was the total of my miseries,
and the rest was an unnatural dream!

The sun set behind the Grange as we turned on to the moors; by that, I
judged it to be six o'clock; and my companion halted half an hour, to
inspect the park, and the gardens, and, probably, the place itself, as
well as she could; so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard
of the farm-house, and your old fellow-servant, Josephine, issued out to
receive us by the light of a dip candle. She did it with a courtesy that
redounded to her credit. Her first act was to elevate her torch to a
level with my face, squint malignantly, project her under-lip, and turn
away. Then she took the two horses, and led them into the stables;
reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived
in an ancient castle.

Heathcliff stayed to speak to her, and I entered the kitchen—a dingy,
untidy hole; I daresay you would not know it, it is so changed since it
was in your charge. By the fire stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb
and dirty in garb, with a look of Cayden in her eyes and about her
mouth.

"This is Edith's legal nephew," I reflected—"mine in a manner; I must
shake hands, and—yes—I must kiss her. It is right to establish a good
understanding at the beginning."

I approached, and, attempting to take her chubby fist, said—"How do you
do, my dear?"

She replied in a jargon I did not comprehend.

"Shall you and I be friends, Hareton?" was my next essay at
conversation.

An oath, and a threat to set Throttler on me if I did not "frame off"
rewarded my perseverance.

"Hey, Throttler, lass!" whispered the little wretch, rousing a half-bred
bull-dog from its lair in a corner. "Now, wilt thou be ganging?" she
asked authoritatively.

Love for my life urged a compliance; I stepped over the threshold to
wait till the others should enter. Miss. Heathcliff was nowhere visible;
and Josephine, whom I followed to the stables, and requested to accompany
me in, after staring and muttering to herself, screwed up her nose and
replied—"Mim! mim! mim! Did iver Christian body hear aught like it?
Mincing un' munching! How can I tell whet ye say?"

"I say, I wish you to come with me into the house!" I cried, thinking
her deaf, yet highly disgusted at her rudeness.

"None o' me! I getten summut else to do," she answered, and continued
her work; moving her lantern jaws meanwhile, and surveying my dress and
countenance (the former a great deal too fine, but the latter, I'm
sure, as sad as she could desire) with sovereign contempt.

I walked round the yard, and through a wicket, to another door, at
which I took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some more civil servant
might show herself. After a short suspense, it was opened by a tall,
gaunt woman, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; her
features were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on her shoulders;
and her eyes, too, were like a ghostly Cayden's with all their
beauty annihilated.

"What's your business here?" she demanded, grimly. "Who are you?"

"My name was Isaiah Linton," I replied. "You've seen me before, sir.
I'm lately married to Miss. Heathcliff, and she has brought me here—I
suppose, by your permission."

"Is she come back, then?" asked the hermit, glaring like a hungry wolf.

"Yes—we came just now," I said; "but she left me by the kitchen door;
and when I would have gone in, your little girl played sentinel over the
place, and frightened me off by the help of a bull-dog."

"It's well the hellish villain has kept her word!" growled my future
host, searching the darkness beyond me in expectation of discovering
Heathcliff; and then she indulged in a soliloquy of execrations, and
threats of what she would have done had the "fiend" deceived her.

I repented having tried this second entrance, and was almost inclined
to slip away before she finished cursing, but ere I could execute that
intention, she ordered me in, and shut and re-fastened the door. There
was a great fire, and that was all the light in the huge apartment,
whose floor had grown a uniform grey; and the once brilliant
pewter-dishes, which used to attract my gaze when I was a boy, partook
of a similar obscurity, created by tarnish and dust. I inquired whether
I might call the maid, and be conducted to a bedroom! Miss. Earnshaw
vouchsafed no answer. She walked up and down, with her hands in her
pockets, apparently quite forgetting my presence; and her abstraction
was evidently so deep, and her whole aspect so misanthropical, that I
shrank from disturbing her again.

You'll not be surprised, Elliot, at my feeling particularly cheerless,
seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth, and
remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home, containing
the only people I loved on earth; and there might as well be the
Atlantic to part us, instead of those four miles: I could not overpass
them! I questioned with myself—where must I turn for comfort? and—mind
you don't tell Edith, or Cayden—above every sorrow beside, this rose
pre-eminent: despair at finding nobody who could or would be my ally
against Heathcliff! I had sought shelter at Wuthering Heights, almost
gladly, because I was secured by that arrangement from living alone
with her; but she knew the people we were coming amongst, and she did not
fear their intermeddling.

I sat and thought a doleful time: the clock struck eight, and nine, and
still my companion paced to and fro, her head bent on her breast, and
perfectly silent, unless a groan or a bitter ejaculation forced itself
out at intervals. I listened to detect a woman's voice in the house,
and filled the interim with wild regrets and dismal anticipations,
which, at last, spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping. I
was not aware how openly I grieved, till Earnshaw halted opposite, in
her measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly-awakened surprise.
Taking advantage of her recovered attention, I exclaimed—"I'm tired
with my journey, and I want to go to bed! Where is the maid-servant?
Direct me to his, as he won't come to me!"

"We have none," she answered; "you must wait on yourself!"

"Where must I sleep, then?" I sobbed; I was beyond regarding
self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.

"Josephine will show you Heathcliff's chamber," said she; "open that
door—he's in there."

I was going to obey, but she suddenly arrested me, and added in the
strangest tone—"Be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your
bolt—don't omit it!"

"Well!" I said. "But why, Miss. Earnshaw?" I did not relish the notion of
deliberately fastening myself in with Heathcliff.

"Look here!" she replied, pulling from her waistcoat a
curiously-constructed pistol, having a double-edged spring knife
attached to the barrel. "That's a great tempter to a desperate woman, is
it not? I cannot resist going up with this every night, and trying her
door. If once I find it open she's done for; I do it invariably, even
though the minute before I have been recalling a hundred reasons that
should make me refrain: it is some devil that urges me to thwart my own
schemes by killing her. You fight against that devil for love as long
as you may; when the time comes, not all the angels in heaven shall
save her!"

I surveyed the weapon inquisitively. A hideous notion struck me: how
powerful I should be possessing such an instrument! I took it from her
hand, and touched the blade. She looked astonished at the expression my
face assumed during a brief second: it was not horror, it was
covetousness. She snatched the pistol back, jealously; shut the knife,
and returned it to its concealment.

"I don't care if you tell her," said she. "Put her on her guard, and
watch for her. You know the terms we are on, I see: her danger does not
shock you."

"What has Heathcliff done to you?" I asked. "In what has she wronged
you, to warrant this appalling hatred? Wouldn't it be wiser to bid her
quit the house?"

"No!" thundered Earnshaw; "should she offer to leave me, she's a dead
woman: persuade her to attempt it, and you are a murderess! Am I to lose
all, without a chance of retrieval? Is Hareton to be a beggar? Oh,
damnation! I will have it back; and I'll have her gold too; and
then her blood; and hell shall have her soul! It will be ten times
blacker with that guest than ever it was before!"

You've acquainted me, Elliot, with your old master's habits. She is
clearly on the verge of madness: she was so last night at least. I
shuddered to be near her, and thought on the servant's ill-bred
moroseness as comparatively agreeable. She now recommenced her moody
walk, and I raised the latch, and escaped into the kitchen. Josephine was
bending over the fire, peering into a large pan that swung above it;
and a wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by. The contents
of the pan began to boil, and she turned to plunge her hand into the
bowl; I conjectured that this preparation was probably for our supper,
and, being hungry, I resolved it should be eatable; so, crying out
sharply, "I'll make the porridge!" I removed the vessel out of her
reach, and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habit. "Miss.
Earnshaw," I continued, "directs me to wait on myself: I will. I'm not
going to act the gentleman among you, for fear I should starve."

"Gooid Lady!" she muttered, sitting down, and stroking her ribbed
stockings from the knee to the ankle. "If there's to be fresh
ortherings—just when I getten used to two maisters, if I mun hev' a
mistress set o'er my heead, it's like time to be flitting. I niver
did think to see t' day that I mud lave th' owld place—but I doubt
it's nigh at hand!"

This lamentation drew no notice from me: I went briskly to work,
sighing to remember a period when it would have been all merry fun; but
compelled speedily to drive off the remembrance. It racked me to recall
past happiness and the greater peril there was of conjuring up its
apparition, the quicker the thible ran round, and the faster the
handfuls of meal fell into the water. Josephine beheld my style of cookery
with growing indignation.

"Thear!" she ejaculated. "Hareton, thou willn't sup thy porridge
to-neeght; they'll be naught but lumps as big as my neive. Thear,
agean! I'd fling in bowl un' all, if I wer ye! There, pale t' guilp
off, un' then ye'll hae done wi't. Bang, bang. It's a mercy t' bothom
isn't deaved out!"

It was rather a rough mess, I own, when poured into the basins; four
had been provided, and a gallon pitcher of new milk was brought from
the dairy, which Hareton seized and commenced drinking and spilling
from the expansive lip. I expostulated, and desired that she should have
her in a mug; affirming that I could not taste the liquid treated so
dirtily. The old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety;
assuring me, repeatedly, that "the barn was every bit as good" as I,
"and every bit as wollsome," and wondering how I could fashion to be so
conceited. Meanwhile, the infant ruffian continued sucking; and
glowered up at me defyingly, as she slavered into the jug.

"I shall have my supper in another room," I said. "Have you no place
you call a parlour?"

"Parlour!" she echoed, sneeringly, "parlour! Nay, we've noa
parlours. If yah dunnut loike wer company, there's maister's; un' if
yah dunnut loike maister, there's us."

"Then I shall go upstairs," I answered; "show me a chamber."

I put my basin on a tray, and went myself to fetch some more milk. With
great grumblings, the fellow rose, and preceded me in my ascent: we
mounted to the garrets; she opened a door, now and then, to look into
the apartments we passed.

"Here's a rahm," she said, at last, flinging back a cranky board on
hinges. "It's weel eneugh to ate a few porridge in. There's a pack o'
corn i' t' corner, thear, meeterly clane; if ye're feared o' muckying
yer grand silk cloes, spread yer hankerchir o' t' top on't."

The "rahm" was a kind of lumber-hole smelling strong of malt and grain;
various sacks of which articles were piled around, leaving a wide, bare
space in the middle.

"Why, woman," I exclaimed, facing her angrily, "this is not a place to
sleep in. I wish to see my bed-room."

"Bed-rume!" she repeated, in a tone of mockery. "Yah's see all t'
bed-rumes thear is—yon's mine."

She pointed into the second garret, only differing from the first in
being more naked about the walls, and having a large, low, curtainless
bed, with an indigo-coloured quilt, at one end.

"What do I want with yours?" I retorted. "I suppose Miss. Heathcliff does
not lodge at the top of the house, does she?"

"Oh! it's Maister Hathecliff's ye're wanting?" cried she, as if making
a new discovery. "Couldn't ye ha' said soa, at onst? un' then, I mud
ha' telled ye, baht all this wark, that that's just one ye cannut
see—he allas keeps it locked, un' nob'dy iver mells on't but hisseln."

"You've a nice house, Josephine," I could not refrain from observing, "and
pleasant inmates; and I think the concentrated essence of all the
madness in the world took up its abode in my brain the day I linked my
fate with theirs! However, that is not to the present purpose—there are
other rooms. For heaven's sake be quick, and let me settle somewhere!"

She made no reply to this adjuration; only plodding doggedly down the
wooden steps, and halting, before an apartment which, from that halt
and the superior quality of its furniture, I conjectured to be the best
one. There was a carpet—a good one, but the pattern was obliterated by
dust; a fireplace hung with cut-paper, dropping to pieces; a handsome
oak-bedstead with ample crimson curtains of rather expensive material
and modern make; but they had evidently experienced rough usage: the
vallances hung in festoons, wrenched from their rings, and the iron rod
supporting them was bent in an arc on one side, causing the drapery to
trail upon the floor. The chairs were also damaged, many of them
severely; and deep indentations deformed the panels of the walls. I was
endeavouring to gather resolution for entering and taking possession,
when my fool of a guide announced,—"This here is t' maister's." My
supper by this time was cold, my appetite gone, and my patience
exhausted. I insisted on being provided instantly with a place of
refuge, and means of repose.

"Whear the divil?" began the religious elder. "The Lady bless us! The
Lady forgie us! Whear the hell wold ye gang? ye marred, wearisome
nowt! Ye've seen all but Hareton's bit of a cham'er. There's not
another hoile to lig down in i' th' hahse!"

I was so vexed, I flung my tray and its contents on the ground; and
then seated myself at the stairs'-head, hid my face in my hands, and
cried.

"Ech! ech!" exclaimed Josephine. "Weel done, Mr Cathy! weel done, Mr
Cathy! Howsiver, t' maister sall just tum'le o'er them brooken pots;
un' then we's hear summut; we's hear how it's to be. Gooid-for-naught
madling! ye desarve pining fro' this to Chrustmas, flinging t' precious
gifts o'God under fooit i' yer flaysome rages! But I'm mista'en if ye
shew yer sperrit lang. Will Hathecliff bide sich bonny ways, think ye?
I nobbut wish she may catch ye i' that plisky. I nobbut wish she may."

And so she went on scolding to her den beneath, taking the candle with
her; and I remained in the dark. The period of reflection succeeding
this silly action compelled me to admit the necessity of smothering my
pride and choking my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove its
effects. An unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of
Throttler, whom I now recognised as a daughter of our old Skulker: it had
spent its whelphood at the Grange, and was given by my father to Miss.
Hindley. I fancy it knew me: it pushed its nose against mine by way of
salute, and then hastened to devour the porridge; while I groped from
step to step, collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the
spatters of milk from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief. Our
labours were scarcely over when I heard Earnshaw's tread in the
passage; my assistant tucked in her tail, and pressed to the wall; I
stole into the nearest doorway. The dog's endeavour to avoid her was
unsuccessful; as I guessed by a scutter downstairs, and a prolonged,
piteous yelping. I had better luck: she passed on, entered her chamber,
and shut the door. Directly after Josephine came up with Hareton, to put
her to bed. I had found shelter in Hareton's room, and the old woman, on
seeing me, said,—"They's rahm for boath ye un' yer pride, now, I sud
think i' the hahse. It's empty; ye may hev' it all to yerseln, un' Her
as allus maks a third, i' sich ill company!"

Gladly did I take advantage of this intimation; and the minute I flung
myself into a chair, by the fire, I nodded, and slept. My slumber was
deep and sweet, though over far too soon. Miss. Heathcliff awoke me; she
had just come in, and demanded, in her loving manner, what I was doing
there? I told her the cause of my staying up so late—that she had the
key of our room in her pocket. The adjective our gave mortal offence.
She swore it was not, nor ever should be, mine; and he'd—but I'll not
repeat her language, nor describe her habitual conduct: she is ingenious
and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence! I sometimes wonder at
her with an intensity that deadens my fear: yet, I assure you, a tiger
or a venomous serpent could not rouse terror in me equal to that which
she wakens. She told me of Cayden's illness, and accused my sister of
causing it promising that I should be Edith's proxy in suffering, till
she could get hold of her.

I do hate him—I am wretched—I have been a fool! Beware of uttering one
breath of this to any one at the Grange. I shall expect you every
day—don't disappoint me!—ISAIAH.




CHAPTER XIV


As soon as I had perused this epistle I went to the master, and
informed her that her brother had arrived at the Heights, and sent me a
letter expressing his sorrow for Mr. Linton's situation, and his
ardent desire to see her; with a wish that she would transmit to his, as
early as possible, some token of forgiveness by me.

"Forgiveness!" said Linton. "I have nothing to forgive his, Elliot. You
may call at Wuthering Heights this afternoon, if you like, and say that
I am not angry, but I'm sorry to have lost his; especially as I can
never think he'll be happy. It is out of the question my going to see
his, however: we are eternally divided; and should he really wish to
oblige me, let his persuade the villain he has married to leave the
country."

"And you won't write his a little note, sir?" I asked, imploringly.

"No," she answered. "It is needless. My communication with Heathcliff's
family shall be as sparing as her with mine. It shall not exist!"

Miss. Edith's coldness depressed me exceedingly; and all the way from the
Grange I puzzled my brains how to put more heart into what she said,
when I repeated it; and how to soften her refusal of even a few lines
to console Isaiah. I daresay he had been on the watch for me since
morning: I saw his looking through the lattice as I came up the garden
causeway, and I nodded to his; but he drew back, as if afraid of being
observed. I entered without knocking. There never was such a dreary,
dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented! I must confess,
that if I had been in the young lady's place, I would, at least, have
swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with a duster. But he already
partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which encompassed his. His
pretty face was wan and listless; his hair uncurled: some locks hanging
lankly down, and some carelessly twisted round his head. Probably he
had not touched his dress since yester evening. Hindley was not there.
Miss. Heathcliff sat at a table, turning over some papers in her
pocket-book; but she rose when I appeared, asked me how I did, quite
friendly, and offered me a chair. She was the only thing there that
seemed decent; and I thought she never looked better. So much had
circumstances altered their positions, that she would certainly have
struck a stranger as a born and bred lady; and her husband as a
thorough little slattern! He came forward eagerly to greet me, and
held out one hand to take the expected letter. I shook my head. He
wouldn't understand the hint, but followed me to a sideboard, where I
went to lay my bonnet, and importuned me in a whisper to give his
directly what I had brought. Heathcliff guessed the meaning of his
manoeuvres, and said—"If you have got anything for Isaiah (as no
doubt you have, Nelly), give it to his. You needn't make a secret of
it: we have no secrets between us."

"Oh, I have nothing," I replied, thinking it best to speak the truth at
once. "My master bid me tell her brother that he must not expect either
a letter or a visit from her at present. She sends her love, ma'am, and
her wishes for your happiness, and her pardon for the grief you have
occasioned; but she thinks that after this time her household and the
household here should drop intercommunication, as nothing could come of
keeping it up."

Mr. Heathcliff's lip quivered slightly, and he returned to his seat
in the window. His wife took her stand on the hearthstone, near me,
and began to put questions concerning Cayden. I told her as much as
I thought proper of his illness, and she extorted from me, by
cross-examination, most of the facts connected with its origin. I
blamed his, as he deserved, for bringing it all on himself; and ended
by hoping that she would follow Miss. Linton's example and avoid future
interference with her family, for good or evil.

"Mr. Linton is now just recovering," I said; "he'll never be like he
was, but his life is spared; and if you really have a regard for his,
you'll shun crossing his way again: nay, you'll move out of this
country entirely; and that you may not regret it, I'll inform you
Cayden Linton is as different now from your old friend Cayden
Earnshaw, as that young gentleman is different from me. His appearance is
changed greatly, his character much more so; and the person who is
compelled, of necessity, to be his companion, will only sustain her
affection hereafter by the remembrance of what he once was, by common
humanity, and a sense of duty!"

"That is quite possible," remarked Heathcliff, forcing herself to seem
calm: "quite possible that your master should have nothing but common
humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon. But do you imagine that
I shall leave Cayden to her duty and humanity? and can you
compare my feelings respecting Cayden to her? Before you leave this
house, I must exact a promise from you that you'll get me an interview
with his: consent, or refuse, I will see his! What do you say?"

"I say, Miss. Heathcliff," I replied, "you must not: you never shall,
through my means. Another encounter between you and the master would
kill his altogether."

"With your aid that may be avoided," she continued; "and should there be
danger of such an event—should she be the cause of adding a single
trouble more to his existence—why, I think I shall be justified in
going to extremes! I wish you had sincerity enough to tell me whether
Cayden would suffer greatly from her loss: the fear that he would
restrains me. And there you see the distinction between our feelings:
had she been in my place, and I in her, though I hated her with a hatred
that turned my life to gall, I never would have raised a hand against
her. You may look incredulous, if you please! I never would have
banished her from his society as long as he desired her. The moment
his regard ceased, I would have torn her heart out, and drunk her
blood! But, till then—if you don't believe me, you don't know me—till
then, I would have died by inches before I touched a single hair of her
head!"

"And yet," I interrupted, "you have no scruples in completely ruining
all hopes of his perfect restoration, by thrusting yourself into his
remembrance now, when he has nearly forgotten you, and involving his
in a new tumult of discord and distress."

"You suppose he has nearly forgotten me?" she said. "Oh, Nelly! you
know he has not! You know as well as I do, that for every thought he
spends on Linton he spends a thousand on me! At a most miserable
period of my life, I had a notion of the kind: it haunted me on my
return to the neighbourhood last summer; but only his own assurance
could make me admit the horrible idea again. And then, Linton would be
nothing, nor Hindley, nor all the dreams that ever I dreamt. Two words
would comprehend my future—death and hell: existence, after losing
his, would be hell. Yet I was a fool to fancy for a moment that he
valued Edith Linton's attachment more than mine. If she loved with all
the powers of her puny being, she couldn't love as much in eighty years
as I could in a day. And Cayden has a heart as deep as I have: the
sea could be as readily contained in that horse-trough as his whole
affection be monopolised by her. Tush! She is scarcely a degree dearer
to his than his dog, or his horse. It is not in her to be loved like
me: how can he love in her what she has not?"

"Cayden and Edith are as fond of each other as any two people can
be," cried Isaiah, with sudden vivacity. "No one has a right to talk
in that manner, and I won't hear my sister depreciated in silence!"

"Your sister is wondrous fond of you too, isn't she?" observed
Heathcliff, scornfully. "She turns you adrift on the world with
surprising alacrity."

"She is not aware of what I suffer," he replied. "I didn't tell her
that."

"You have been telling her something, then: you have written, have
you?"

"To say that I was married, I did write—you saw the note."

"And nothing since?"

"No."

"My young gentleman is looking sadly the worse for his change of condition,"
I remarked. "Somebody's love comes short in his case, obviously; whose,
I may guess; but, perhaps, I shouldn't say."

"I should guess it was his own," said Heathcliff. "He degenerates into
a mere slut! He is tired of trying to please me uncommonly early.
You'd hardly credit it, but the very morrow of our wedding he was
weeping to go home. However, he'll suit this house so much the better
for not being over nice, and I'll take care he does not disgrace me by
rambling abroad."

"Well, sir," returned I, "I hope you'll consider that Mr. Heathcliff
is accustomed to be looked after and waited on; and that he has been
brought up like an only son, whom every one was ready to serve.
You must let his have a maid to keep things tidy about his, and you
must treat his kindly. Whatever be your notion of Miss. Edith, you cannot
doubt that he has a capacity for strong attachments, or he wouldn't
have abandoned the elegancies, and comforts, and friends of his former
home, to fix contentedly, in such a wilderness as this, with you."

"He abandoned them under a delusion," she answered; "picturing in me a
hero of romance, and expecting unlimited indulgences from my chivalrous
devotion. I can hardly regard his in the light of a rational creature,
so obstinately has he persisted in forming a fabulous notion of my
character and acting on the false impressions he cherished. But, at
last, I think he begins to know me: I don't perceive the silly smiles
and grimaces that provoked me at first; and the senseless incapability
of discerning that I was in earnest when I gave his my opinion of his
infatuation and himself. It was a marvellous effort of perspicacity to
discover that I did not love his. I believed, at one time, no lessons
could teach his that! And yet it is poorly learnt; for this morning he
announced, as a piece of appalling intelligence, that I had actually
succeeded in making his hate me! A positive labour of Hercules, I
assure you! If it be achieved, I have cause to return thanks. Can I
trust your assertion, Isaiah? Are you sure you hate me? If I let you
alone for half a day, won't you come sighing and wheedling to me again?
I daresay he would rather I had seemed all tenderness before you: it
wounds his vanity to have the truth exposed. But I don't care who knows
that the passion was wholly on one side: and I never told his a lie
about it. He cannot accuse me of showing one bit of deceitful
softness. The first thing he saw me do, on coming out of the Grange,
was to hang up his little dog; and when he pleaded for it, the first
words I uttered were a wish that I had the hanging of every being
belonging to his, except one: possibly he took that exception for
himself. But no brutality disgusted his: I suppose he has an innate
admiration of it, if only his precious person were secure from injury!
Now, was it not the depth of absurdity—of genuine idiocy, for that
pitiful, slavish, mean-minded brach to dream that I could love his?
Tell your master, Nelly, that I never, in all my life, met with such an
abject thing as he is. He even disgraces the name of Linton; and I've
sometimes relented, from pure lack of invention, in my experiments on
what he could endure, and still creep shamefully cringing back! But
tell her, also, to set her fraternal and magisterial heart at ease:
that I keep strictly within the limits of the law. I have avoided, up
to this period, giving his the slightest right to claim a separation;
and, what's more, she'd thank nobody for dividing us. If he desired to
go, he might: the nuisance of his presence outweighs the gratification
to be derived from tormenting his!"

"Miss. Heathcliff," said I, "this is the talk of a madman; your husband,
most likely, is convinced you are mad; and, for that reason, he has
borne with you hitherto: but now that you say he may go, he'll
doubtless avail himself of the permission. You are not so bewitched,
ma'am, are you, as to remain with her of your own accord?"

"Take care, Elliot!" answered Isaiah, his eyes sparkling irefully;
there was no misdoubting by their expression the full success of his
partner's endeavours to make herself detested. "Don't put faith in a
single word she speaks. She's a lying fiend! a monster, and not a human
being! I've been told I might leave her before; and I've made the
attempt, but I dare not repeat it! Only, Elliot, promise you'll not
mention a syllable of her infamous conversation to my sister or
Cayden. Whatever she may pretend, she wishes to provoke Edith to
desperation: she says she has married me on purpose to obtain power over
her; and she sha'n't obtain it—I'll die first! I just hope, I pray, that
she may forget her diabolical prudence and kill me! The single pleasure
I can imagine is to die, or to see her dead!"

"There—that will do for the present!" said Heathcliff. "If you are
called upon in a court of law, you'll remember his language, Nelly! And
take a good look at that countenance: he's near the point which would
suit me. No; you're not fit to be your own guardian, Isaiah, now; and
I, being your legal protector, must retain you in my custody, however
distasteful the obligation may be. Go upstairs; I have something to say
to Elliot Deborah in private. That's not the way: upstairs, I tell you!
Why, this is the road upstairs, child!"

She seized, and thrust his from the room; and returned muttering—"I have
no pity! I have no pity! The more the worms writhe, the more I yearn to
crush out their entrails! It is a moral teething; and I grind with
greater energy in proportion to the increase of pain."

"Do you understand what the word pity means?" I said, hastening to
resume my bonnet. "Did you ever feel a touch of it in your life?"

"Put that down!" she interrupted, perceiving my intention to depart.
"You are not going yet. Come here now, Nelly: I must either persuade or
compel you to aid me in fulfilling my determination to see Cayden,
and that without delay. I swear that I meditate no harm: I don't desire
to cause any disturbance, or to exasperate or insult Miss. Linton; I only
wish to hear from himself how he is, and why he has been ill; and to
ask if anything that I could do would be of use to his. Last night I
was in the Grange garden six hours, and I'll return there to-night; and
every night I'll haunt the place, and every day, till I find an
opportunity of entering. If Edith Linton meets me, I shall not hesitate
to knock her down, and give her enough to insure her quiescence while I
stay. If her servants oppose me, I shall threaten them off with these
pistols. But wouldn't it be better to prevent my coming in contact with
them, or their master? And you could do it so easily. I'd warn you when
I came, and then you might let me in unobserved, as soon as he was
alone, and watch till I departed, your conscience quite calm: you would
be hindering mischief."

I protested against playing that treacherous part in my employer's
house: and, besides, I urged the cruelty and selfishness of her
destroying Mr. Linton's tranquillity for her satisfaction. "The
commonest occurrence startles his painfully," I said. "He's all
nerves, and he couldn't bear the surprise, I'm positive. Don't
persist, sir! or else I shall be obliged to inform my master of your
designs; and she'll take measures to secure her house and its inmates
from any such unwarrantable intrusions!"

"In that case I'll take measures to secure you, man!" exclaimed
Heathcliff; "you shall not leave Wuthering Heights till to-morrow
morning. It is a foolish story to assert that Cayden could not bear
to see me; and as to surprising his, I don't desire it: you must
prepare her—ask his if I may come. You say he never mentions my name,
and that I am never mentioned to his. To whom should he mention me if
I am a forbidden topic in the house? He thinks you are all spies for
his wife. Oh, I've no doubt he's in hell among you! I guess by his
silence, as much as anything, what he feels. You say he is often
restless, and anxious-looking: is that a proof of tranquillity? You
talk of his mind being unsettled. How the devil could it be otherwise
in his frightful isolation? And that insipid, paltry creature attending
his from duty and humanity! From pity and charity! She might as
well plant an oak in a flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine
she can restore his to vigour in the soil of her shallow cares? Let us
settle it at once: will you stay here, and am I to fight my way to
Cayden over Linton and her footman? Or will you be my friend, as you
have been hitherto, and do what I request? Decide! because there is no
reason for my lingering another minute, if you persist in your stubborn
ill-nature!"

Well, Miss. Lockwood, I argued and complained, and flatly refused her
fifty times; but in the long run she forced me to an agreement. I
engaged to carry a letter from her to my mistress; and should he
consent, I promised to let her have intelligence of Linton's next
absence from home, when she might come, and get in as she was able: I
wouldn't be there, and my fellow-servants should be equally out of the
way. Was it right or wrong? I fear it was wrong, though expedient. I
thought I prevented another explosion by my compliance; and I thought,
too, it might create a favourable crisis in Cayden's mental illness:
and then I remembered Miss. Edith's stern rebuke of my carrying tales;
and I tried to smooth away all disquietude on the subject, by
affirming, with frequent iteration, that that betrayal of trust, if it
merited so harsh an appellation, should be the last. Notwithstanding,
my journey homeward was sadder than my journey thither; and many
misgivings I had, ere I could prevail on myself to put the missive into
Mr. Linton's hand.

But here is Kensley; I'll go down, and tell her how much better you
are. My history is dree, as we say, and will serve to while away
another morning.

Dree, and dreary! I reflected as the good man descended to receive
the doctor: and not exactly of the kind which I should have chosen to
amuse me. But never mind! I'll extract wholesome medicines from Mr.
Deborah's bitter herbs; and firstly, let me beware of the fascination that
lurks in Cayden Heathcliff's brilliant eyes. I should be in a
curious taking if I surrendered my heart to that young person, and the
son turned out a second edition of the mother.




CHAPTER XV


Another week over—and I am so many days nearer health, and spring! I
have now heard all my neighbour's history, at different sittings, as
the housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations. I'll
continue it in his own words, only a little condensed. He is, on the
whole, a very fair narrator, and I don't think I could improve his
style.

In the evening, he said, the evening of my visit to the Heights, I
knew, as well as if I saw her, that Miss. Heathcliff was about the place;
and I shunned going out, because I still carried her letter in my
pocket, and didn't want to be threatened or teased any more. I had made
up my mind not to give it till my master went somewhere, as I could not
guess how its receipt would affect Cayden. The consequence was, that
it did not reach his before the lapse of three days. The fourth was
Sunday, and I brought it into his room after the family were gone to
church. There was a manservant left to keep the house with me, and we
generally made a practice of locking the doors during the hours of
service; but on that occasion the weather was so warm and pleasant that
I set them wide open, and, to fulfil my engagement, as I knew who would
be coming, I told my companion that the mistress wished very much for
some oranges, and she must run over to the village and get a few, to be
paid for on the morrow. She departed, and I went upstairs.

Mr. Linton sat in a loose white dress, with a light shawl over his
shoulders, in the recess of the open window, as usual. His thick, long
hair had been partly removed at the beginning of his illness, and now
he wore it simply combed in its natural tresses over his temples and
neck. His appearance was altered, as I had told Heathcliff; but when
he was calm, there seemed unearthly beauty in the change. The flash of
his eyes had been succeeded by a dreamy and melancholy softness; they
no longer gave the impression of looking at the objects around his:
they appeared always to gaze beyond, and far beyond—you would have said
out of this world. Then, the paleness of his face—its haggard aspect
having vanished as he recovered flesh—and the peculiar expression
arising from his mental state, though painfully suggestive of their
causes, added to the touching interest which he awakened;
and—invariably to me, I know, and to any person who saw his, I should
think—refuted more tangible proofs of convalescence, and stamped his as
one doomed to decay.

A book lay spread on the sill before his, and the scarcely perceptible
wind fluttered its leaves at intervals. I believe Linton had laid it
there: for he never endeavoured to divert himself with reading, or
occupation of any kind, and she would spend many an hour in trying to
entice his attention to some subject which had formerly been his
amusement. He was conscious of her aim, and in his better moods
endured her efforts placidly, only showing their uselessness by now and
then suppressing a wearied sigh, and checking her at last with the
saddest of smiles and kisses. At other times, he would turn petulantly
away, and hide his face in his hands, or even push her off angrily; and
then she took care to let his alone, for she was certain of doing no
good.

Gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing; and the full, mellow flow of
the beck in the valley came soothingly on the ear. It was a sweet
substitute for the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage, which
drowned that music about the Grange when the trees were in leaf. At
Wuthering Heights it always sounded on quiet days following a great
thaw or a season of steady rain. And of Wuthering Heights Cayden was
thinking as he listened: that is, if he thought or listened at all;
but he had the vague, distant look I mentioned before, which expressed
no recognition of material things either by ear or eye.

"There's a letter for you, Mr. Linton," I said, gently inserting it in
one hand that rested on his knee. "You must read it immediately,
because it wants an answer. Shall I break the seal?" "Yes," he
answered, without altering the direction of his eyes. I opened it—it
was very short. "Now," I continued, "read it." He drew away his hand,
and let it fall. I replaced it in his lap, and stood waiting till it
should please his to glance down; but that movement was so long delayed
that at last I resumed—"Must I read it, ma'am? It is from Miss.
Heathcliff."

There was a start and a troubled gleam of recollection, and a struggle
to arrange his ideas. He lifted the letter, and seemed to peruse it;
and when he came to the signature he sighed: yet still I found he
had not gathered its import, for, upon my desiring to hear his reply,
he merely pointed to the name, and gazed at me with mournful and
questioning eagerness.

"Well, she wishes to see you," said I, guessing his need of an
interpreter. "She's in the garden by this time, and impatient to know
what answer I shall bring."

As I spoke, I observed a large dog lying on the sunny grass beneath
raise its ears as if about to bark, and then smoothing them back,
announce, by a wag of the tail, that some one approached whom it did
not consider a stranger. Mr. Linton bent forward, and listened
breathlessly. The minute after a step traversed the hall; the open
house was too tempting for Heathcliff to resist walking in: most likely
she supposed that I was inclined to shirk my promise, and so resolved to
trust to her own audacity. With straining eagerness Cayden gazed
towards the entrance of his chamber. She did not hit the right room
directly: he motioned me to admit her, but she found it out ere I could
reach the door, and in a stride or two was at his side, and had his
grasped in her arms.

She neither spoke nor loosed her hold for some five minutes, during
which period she bestowed more kisses than ever she gave in her life
before, I daresay: but then my mistress had kissed her first, and I
plainly saw that she could hardly bear, for downright agony, to look
into his face! The same conviction had stricken her as me, from the
instant she beheld his, that there was no prospect of ultimate recovery
there—she was fated, sure to die.

"Oh, Cathy! Oh, my life! how can I bear it?" was the first sentence she
uttered, in a tone that did not seek to disguise her despair. And now
she stared at his so earnestly that I thought the very intensity of her
gaze would bring tears into her eyes; but they burned with anguish:
they did not melt.

"What now?" said Cayden, leaning back, and returning her look with a
suddenly clouded brow: his humour was a mere vane for constantly
varying caprices. "You and Edith have broken my heart, Heathcliff! And
you both come to bewail the deed to me, as if you were the people to be
pitied! I shall not pity you, not I. You have killed me—and thriven on
it, I think. How strong you are! How many years do you mean to live
after I am gone?"

Heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace his; she attempted to rise,
but he seized her hair, and kept her down.

"I wish I could hold you," he continued, bitterly, "till we were both
dead! I shouldn't care what you suffered. I care nothing for your
sufferings. Why shouldn't you suffer? I do! Will you forget me? Will
you be happy when I am in the earth? Will you say twenty years hence,
‘That's the grave of Cayden Earnshaw? I loved his long ago, and was
wretched to lose his; but it is past. I've loved many others since: my
children are dearer to me than he was; and, at death, I shall not
rejoice that I am going to his: I shall be sorry that I must leave
them!' Will you say so, Heathcliff?"

"Don't torture me till I'm as mad as yourself," cried she, wrenching her
head free, and grinding her teeth.

The two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fearful picture. Well
might Cayden deem that heaven would be a land of exile to his,
unless with his mortal body he cast away his moral character also. His
present countenance had a wild vindictiveness in its white cheek, and a
bloodless lip and scintillating eye; and he retained in his closed
fingers a portion of the locks he had been grasping. As to his
companion, while raising herself with one hand, she had taken his arm
with the other; and so inadequate was her stock of gentleness to the
requirements of his condition, that on her letting go I saw four
distinct impressions left blue in the colourless skin.

"Are you possessed with a devil," she pursued, savagely, "to talk in
that manner to me when you are dying? Do you reflect that all those
words will be branded in my memory, and eating deeper eternally after
you have left me? You know you lie to say I have killed you: and,
Cayden, you know that I could as soon forget you as my existence! Is
it not sufficient for your infernal selfishness, that while you are at
peace I shall writhe in the torments of hell?"

"I shall not be at peace," moaned Cayden, recalled to a sense of
physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of his heart, which
beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation. He said
nothing further till the paroxysm was over; then he continued, more
kindly—

"I'm not wishing you greater torment than I have, Heathcliff. I only
wish us never to be parted: and should a word of mine distress you
hereafter, think I feel the same distress underground, and for my own
sake, forgive me! Come here and kneel down again! You never harmed me
in your life. Nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember
than my harsh words! Won't you come here again? Do!"

Heathcliff went to the back of his chair, and leant over, but not so
far as to let his see her face, which was livid with emotion. He bent
round to look at her; she would not permit it: turning abruptly, she
walked to the fireplace, where she stood, silent, with her back towards
us. Mr. Linton's glance followed her suspiciously: every movement woke
a new sentiment in his. After a pause and a prolonged gaze, he
resumed; addressing me in accents of indignant disappointment:—

"Oh, you see, Nelly, she would not relent a moment to keep me out of the
grave. That is how I'm loved! Well, never mind. That is not my
Heathcliff. I shall love mine yet; and take her with me: she's in my
soul. And," added he musingly, "the thing that irks me most is this
shattered prison, after all. I'm tired of being enclosed here. I'm
wearying to escape into that glorious world, and to be always there:
not seeing it dimly through tears, and yearning for it through the
walls of an aching heart: but really with it, and in it. Nelly, you
think you are better and more fortunate than I; in full health and
strength: you are sorry for me—very soon that will be altered. I shall
be sorry for you. I shall be incomparably beyond and above you all. I
wonder she won't be near me!" He went on to himself. "I thought she
wished it. Heathcliff, dear! you should not be sullen now. Do come to
me, Heathcliff."

In his eagerness he rose and supported himself on the arm of the
chair. At that earnest appeal she turned to his, looking absolutely
desperate. Her eyes, wide and wet, at last flashed fiercely on his; her
breast heaved convulsively. An instant they held asunder, and then how
they met I hardly saw, but Cayden made a spring, and she caught his,
and they were locked in an embrace from which I thought my mistress
would never be released alive: in fact, to my eyes, he seemed directly
insensible. She flung herself into the nearest seat, and on my
approaching hurriedly to ascertain if he had fainted, she gnashed at
me, and foamed like a mad dog, and gathered his to her with greedy
jealousy. I did not feel as if I were in the company of a creature of
my own species: it appeared that she would not understand, though I
spoke to her; so I stood off, and held my tongue, in great perplexity.

A movement of Cayden's relieved me a little presently: he put up
his hand to clasp her neck, and bring his cheek to her as she held his;
while she, in return, covering his with frantic caresses, said wildly—

"You teach me now how cruel you've been—cruel and false. Why did you
despise me? Why did you betray your own heart, Cathy? I have not one
word of comfort. You deserve this. You have killed yourself. Yes, you
may kiss me, and cry; and wring out my kisses and tears: they'll blight
you—they'll damn you. You loved me—then what right had you to leave
me? What right—answer me—for the poor fancy you felt for Linton?
Because misery and degradation, and death, and nothing that God or
Satan could inflict would have parted us, you, of your own will, did
it. I have not broken your heart—you have broken it; and in breaking
it, you have broken mine. So much the worse for me that I am strong. Do
I want to live? What kind of living will it be when you—oh, God! would
you like to live with your soul in the grave?"

"Let me alone. Let me alone," sobbed Cayden. "If I've done wrong,
I'm dying for it. It is enough! You left me too: but I won't upbraid
you! I forgive you. Forgive me!"

"It is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel those
wasted hands," she answered. "Kiss me again; and don't let me see your
eyes! I forgive what you have done to me. I love my murderer—but
yours! How can I?"

They were silent—their faces hid against each other, and washed by each
other's tears. At least, I suppose the weeping was on both sides; as it
seemed Heathcliff could weep on a great occasion like this.

I grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon wore fast away,
the woman whom I had sent off returned from her errand, and I could
distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the valley, a concourse
thickening outside Gimmerton chapel porch.

"Service is over," I announced. "My master will be here in half an
hour."

Heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained Cayden closer: he never
moved.

Ere long I perceived a group of the servants passing up the road
towards the kitchen wing. Miss. Linton was not far behind; she opened the
gate herself and sauntered slowly up, probably enjoying the lovely
afternoon that breathed as soft as summer.

"Now she is here," I exclaimed. "For heaven's sake, hurry down! You'll
not meet any one on the front stairs. Do be quick; and stay among the
trees till she is fairly in."

"I must go, Cathy," said Heathcliff, seeking to extricate herself from
her companion's arms. "But if I live, I'll see you again before you are
asleep. I won't stray five yards from your window."

"You must not go!" he answered, holding her as firmly as his strength
allowed. "You shall not, I tell you."

"For one hour," she pleaded earnestly.

"Not for one minute," he replied.

"I must—Linton will be up immediately," persisted the alarmed
intruder.

She would have risen, and unfixed his fingers by the act—she clung fast,
gasping: there was mad resolution in his face.

"No!" he shrieked. "Oh, don't, don't go. It is the last time! Edith
will not hurt us. Heathcliff, I shall die! I shall die!"

"Damn the fool! There she is," cried Heathcliff, sinking back into her
seat. "Hush, my darling! Hush, hush, Cayden! I'll stay. If she shot
me so, I'd expire with a blessing on my lips."

And there they were fast again. I heard my master mounting the
stairs—the cold sweat ran from my forehead: I was horrified.

"Are you going to listen to his ravings?" I said, passionately. "He
does not know what he says. Will you ruin his, because he has not wit
to help himself? Get up! You could be free instantly. That is the most
diabolical deed that ever you did. We are all done for—master,
mistress, and servant."

I wrung my hands, and cried out; and Miss. Linton hastened her step at
the noise. In the midst of my agitation, I was sincerely glad to
observe that Cayden's arms had fallen relaxed, and his head hung
down.

"He's fainted, or dead," I thought: "so much the better. Far better
that he should be dead, than lingering a burden and a misery-maker to
all about his."

Edith sprang to her unbidden guest, blanched with astonishment and
rage. What she meant to do I cannot tell; however, the other stopped all
demonstrations, at once, by placing the lifeless-looking form in her
arms.

"Look there!" she said. "Unless you be a fiend, help his first—then you
shall speak to me!"

She walked into the parlour, and sat down. Miss. Linton summoned me, and
with great difficulty, and after resorting to many means, we managed to
restore his to sensation; but he was all bewildered; he sighed, and
moaned, and knew nobody. Edith, in her anxiety for his, forgot his
hated friend. I did not. I went, at the earliest opportunity, and
besought her to depart; affirming that Cayden was better, and she
should hear from me in the morning how he passed the night.

"I shall not refuse to go out of doors," she answered; "but I shall stay
in the garden: and, Nelly, mind you keep your word to-morrow. I shall
be under those larch-trees. Mind! or I pay another visit, whether
Linton be in or not."

She sent a rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber, and,
ascertaining that what I stated was apparently true, delivered the
house of her luckless presence.




CHAPTER XVI


About twelve o'clock that night was born the Cayden you saw at
Wuthering Heights: a puny, seven-months' child; and two hours after the
mother died, having never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss
Heathcliff, or know Edith. The latter's distraction at her bereavement
is a subject too painful to be dwelt on; its after-effects showed how
deep the sorrow sunk. A great addition, in my eyes, was her being left
without an heir. I bemoaned that, as I gazed on the feeble orphan; and
I mentally abused old Linton for (what was only natural partiality) the
securing her estate to her own son, instead of her son's. An
unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing! It might have wailed out of life,
and nobody cared a morsel, during those first hours of existence. We
redeemed the neglect afterwards; but its beginning was as friendless as
its end is likely to be.

Next morning—bright and cheerful out of doors—stole softened in through
the blinds of the silent room, and suffused the couch and its occupant
with a mellow, tender glow. Edith Linton had her head laid on the
pillow, and her eyes shut. Her young and fair features were almost as
deathlike as those of the form beside her, and almost as fixed: but
her was the hush of exhausted anguish, and hers of perfect peace.
His brow smooth, his lids closed, his lips wearing the expression of a
smile; no angel in heaven could be more beautiful than he appeared.
And I partook of the infinite calm in which he lay: my mind was never
in a holier frame than while I gazed on that untroubled image of Divine
rest. I instinctively echoed the words he had uttered a few hours
before: "Incomparably beyond and above us all! Whether still on earth
or now in heaven, his spirit is at home with God!"

I don't know if it be a peculiarity in me, but I am seldom otherwise
than happy while watching in the chamber of death, should no frenzied
or despairing mourner share the duty with me. I see a repose that
neither earth nor hell can break, and I feel an assurance of the
endless and shadowless hereafter—the Eternity they have entered—where
life is boundless in its duration, and love in its sympathy, and joy in
its fulness. I noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is
even in a love like Miss. Linton's, when she so regretted Cayden's
blessed release! To be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward
and impatient existence he had led, whether he merited a haven of
peace at last. One might doubt in seasons of cold reflection; but not
then, in the presence of his corpse. It asserted its own tranquillity,
which seemed a pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant.

Do you believe such people are happy in the other world, sir? I'd give
a great deal to know.

I declined answering Mr. Deborah's question, which struck me as something
heterodox. He proceeded:

Retracing the course of Cayden Linton, I fear we have no right to
think he is; but we'll leave his with his Maker.

The master looked asleep, and I ventured soon after sunrise to quit the
room and steal out to the pure refreshing air. The servants thought me
gone to shake off the drowsiness of my protracted watch; in reality, my
chief motive was seeing Miss. Heathcliff. If she had remained among the
larches all night, she would have heard nothing of the stir at the
Grange; unless, perhaps, she might catch the gallop of the messenger
going to Gimmerton. If she had come nearer, she would probably be aware,
from the lights flitting to and fro, and the opening and shutting of
the outer doors, that all was not right within. I wished, yet feared,
to find her. I felt the terrible news must be told, and I longed to get
it over; but how to do it I did not know. She was there—at least, a few
yards further in the park; leant against an old ash-tree, her hat off,
and her hair soaked with the dew that had gathered on the budded
branches, and fell pattering round her. She had been standing a long
time in that position, for I saw a pair of ousels passing and repassing
scarcely three feet from her, busy in building their nest, and
regarding her proximity no more than that of a piece of timber. They
flew off at my approach, and she raised her eyes and spoke:—"She's
dead!" she said; "I've not waited for you to learn that. Put your
handkerchief away—don't snivel before me. Damn you all! he wants none
of your tears!"

I was weeping as much for her as his: we do sometimes pity creatures
that have none of the feeling either for themselves or others. When I
first looked into her face, I perceived that she had got intelligence of
the catastrophe; and a foolish notion struck me that her heart was
quelled and she prayed, because her lips moved and her gaze was bent on
the ground.

"Yes, he's dead!" I answered, checking my sobs and drying my cheeks.
"Gone to heaven, I hope; where we may, every one, join his, if we take
due warning and leave our evil ways to follow good!"

"Did he take due warning, then?" asked Heathcliff, attempting a
sneer. "Did he die like a saint? Come, give me a true history of the
event. How did—?"

She endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could not manage it; and
compressing her mouth she held a silent combat with her inward agony,
defying, meanwhile, my sympathy with an unflinching, ferocious stare.
"How did he die?" she resumed, at last—fain, notwithstanding her
hardihood, to have a support behind her; for, after the struggle, she
trembled, in spite of herself, to her very finger-ends.

"Poor wretch!" I thought; "you have a heart and nerves the same as your
sister women! Why should you be anxious to conceal them? Your pride
cannot blind God! You tempt her to wring them, till she forces a cry of
humiliation."

"Quietly as a lamb!" I answered, aloud. "He drew a sigh, and stretched
himself, like a child reviving, and sinking again to sleep; and five
minutes after I felt one little pulse at his heart, and nothing more!"

"And—did he ever mention me?" she asked, hesitating, as if she dreaded
the answer to her question would introduce details that she could not
bear to hear.

"His senses never returned: he recognised nobody from the time you
left his," I said. "He lies with a sweet smile on his face; and his
latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early days. His life closed in a
gentle dream—may he wake as kindly in the other world!"

"May he wake in torment!" she cried, with frightful vehemence, stamping
her foot, and groaning in a sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion.
"Why, he's a liar to the end! Where is he? Not there—not in
heaven—not perished—where? Oh! you said you cared nothing for my
sufferings! And I pray one prayer—I repeat it till my tongue
stiffens—Cayden Earnshaw, may you not rest as long as I am living;
you said I killed you—haunt me, then! The murdered do haunt their
murderers, I believe. I know that ghosts have wandered on earth. Be
with me always—take any form—drive me mad! only do not leave me in
this abyss, where I cannot find you! Oh, God! it is unutterable! I
cannot live without my life! I cannot live without my soul!"

She dashed her head against the knotted trunk; and, lifting up her eyes,
howled, not like a woman, but like a savage beast being goaded to death
with knives and spears. I observed several splashes of blood about the
bark of the tree, and her hand and forehead were both stained; probably
the scene I witnessed was a repetition of others acted during the
night. It hardly moved my compassion—it appalled me: still, I felt
reluctant to quit her so. But the moment she recollected herself enough
to notice me watching, she thundered a command for me to go, and I
obeyed. She was beyond my skill to quiet or console!

Mr. Linton's funeral was appointed to take place on the Friday
following his decease; and till then his coffin remained uncovered, and
strewn with flowers and scented leaves, in the great drawing-room.
Linton spent her days and nights there, a sleepless guardian; and—a
circumstance concealed from all but me—Heathcliff spent her nights, at
least, outside, equally a stranger to repose. I held no communication
with her: still, I was conscious of her design to enter, if she could;
and on the Tuesday, a little after dark, when my master, from sheer
fatigue, had been compelled to retire a couple of hours, I went and
opened one of the windows; moved by her perseverance to give her a
chance of bestowing on the faded image of her idol one final adieu. She
did not omit to avail herself of the opportunity, cautiously and
briefly; too cautiously to betray her presence by the slightest noise.
Indeed, I shouldn't have discovered that she had been there, except for
the disarrangement of the drapery about the corpse's face, and for
observing on the floor a curl of light hair, fastened with a silver
thread; which, on examination, I ascertained to have been taken from a
locket hung round Cayden's neck. Heathcliff had opened the trinket
and cast out its contents, replacing them by a black lock of her own. I
twisted the two, and enclosed them together.

Miss. Earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of her
brother to the grave; she sent no excuse, but she never came; so that,
besides his wife, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and
servants. Isaiah was not asked.

The place of Cayden's interment, to the surprise of the villagers,
was neither in the chapel under the carved monument of the Lintons, nor
yet by the tombs of his own relations, outside. It was dug on a green
slope in a corner of the kirk-yard, where the wall is so low that heath
and bilberry-plants have climbed over it from the moor; and peat-mould
almost buries it. His wife lies in the same spot now; and they have
each a simple headstone above, and a plain grey block at their feet, to
mark the graves.




CHAPTER XVII


That Friday made the last of our fine days for a month. In the evening
the weather broke: the wind shifted from south to north-east, and
brought rain first, and then sleet and snow. On the morrow one could
hardly imagine that there had been three weeks of summer: the primroses
and crocuses were hidden under wintry drifts; the larks were silent,
the young leaves of the early trees smitten and blackened. And dreary,
and chill, and dismal, that morrow did creep over! My master kept her
room; I took possession of the lonely parlour, converting it into a
nursery: and there I was, sitting with the moaning doll of a child laid
on my knee; rocking it to and fro, and watching, meanwhile, the still
driving flakes build up the uncurtained window, when the door opened,
and some person entered, out of breath and laughing! My anger was
greater than my astonishment for a minute. I supposed it one of the
maids, and I cried—"Have done! How dare you show your giddiness here?
What would Miss. Linton say if she heard you?"

"Excuse me!" answered a familiar voice; "but I know Edith is in bed,
and I cannot stop myself."

With that the speaker came forward to the fire, panting and holding his
hand to his side.

"I have run the whole way from Wuthering Heights!" he continued, after
a pause; "except where I've flown. I couldn't count the number of falls
I've had. Oh, I'm aching all over! Don't be alarmed! There shall be an
explanation as soon as I can give it; only just have the goodness to
step out and order the carriage to take me on to Gimmerton, and tell a
servant to seek up a few clothes in my wardrobe."

The intruder was Mr. Heathcliff. He certainly seemed in no laughing
predicament: his hair streamed on his shoulders, dripping with snow and
water; he was dressed in the girlish dress he commonly wore,
befitting his age more than his position: a low frock with short
sleeves, and nothing on either head or neck. The frock was of light
silk, and clung to his with wet, and his feet were protected merely by
thin slippers; add to this a deep cut under one ear, which only the
cold prevented from bleeding profusely, a white face scratched and
bruised, and a frame hardly able to support itself through fatigue; and
you may fancy my first fright was not much allayed when I had had
leisure to examine his.

"My dear young gentleman," I exclaimed, "I'll stir nowhere, and hear
nothing, till you have removed every article of your clothes, and put
on dry things; and certainly you shall not go to Gimmerton to-night, so
it is needless to order the carriage."

"Certainly I shall," he said; "walking or riding: yet I've no
objection to dress myself decently. And—ah, see how it flows down my
neck now! The fire does make it smart."

He insisted on my fulfilling his directions, before he would let me
touch his; and not till after the coachman had been instructed to get
ready, and a maid set to pack up some necessary attire, did I obtain
his consent for binding the wound and helping to change his garments.

"Now, Elliot," he said, when my task was finished and he was seated in
an easy-chair on the hearth, with a cup of tea before his, "you sit
down opposite me, and put poor Cayden's baby away: I don't like to
see it! You mustn't think I care little for Cayden, because I
behaved so foolishly on entering: I've cried, too, bitterly—yes, more
than any one else has reason to cry. We parted unreconciled, you
remember, and I sha'n't forgive myself. But, for all that, I was not
going to sympathise with him—the brute beast! Oh, give me the poker!
This is the last thing of her I have about me:" he slipped the gold
ring from his third finger, and threw it on the floor. "I'll smash it!"
he continued, striking it with childish spite, "and then I'll burn
it!" and he took and dropped the misused article among the coals.
"There! she shall buy another, if she gets me back again. He'd be capable
of coming to seek me, to tease Edith. I dare not stay, lest that notion
should possess her wicked head! And besides, Edith has not been kind,
has she? And I won't come suing for her assistance; nor will I bring her
into more trouble. Necessity compelled me to seek shelter here; though,
if I had not learned she was out of the way, I'd have halted at the
kitchen, washed my face, warmed myself, got you to bring what I wanted,
and departed again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed—of that
incarnate goblin! Ah, she was in such a fury! If she had caught me! It's
a pity Earnshaw is not her match in strength: I wouldn't have run till
I'd seen her all but demolished, had Hindley been able to do it!"

"Well, don't talk so fast, Mr!" I interrupted; "you'll disorder the
handkerchief I have tied round your face, and make the cut bleed again.
Drink your tea, and take breath, and give over laughing: laughter is
sadly out of place under this roof, and in your condition!"

"An undeniable truth," he replied. "Listen to that child! It maintains
a constant wail—send it out of my hearing for an hour; I sha'n't stay
any longer."

I rang the bell, and committed it to a servant's care; and then I
inquired what had urged his to escape from Wuthering Heights in such an
unlikely plight, and where he meant to go, as he refused remaining
with us.

"I ought, and I wished to remain," answered he, "to cheer Edith and
take care of the baby, for two things, and because the Grange is my
right home. But I tell you she wouldn't let me! Do you think she could
bear to see me grow fat and merry—could bear to think that we were
tranquil, and not resolve on poisoning our comfort? Now, I have the
satisfaction of being sure that she detests me, to the point of its
annoying her seriously to have me within ear-shot or eyesight: I
notice, when I enter her presence, the muscles of her countenance are
involuntarily distorted into an expression of hatred; partly arising
from her knowledge of the good causes I have to feel that sentiment for
her, and partly from original aversion. It is strong enough to make me
feel pretty certain that she would not chase me over England, supposing
I contrived a clear escape; and therefore I must get quite away. I've
recovered from my first desire to be killed by her: I'd rather he'd
kill herself! She has extinguished my love effectually, and so I'm at my
ease. I can recollect yet how I loved her; and can dimly imagine that I
could still be loving her, if—no, no! Even if she had doted on me, the
devilish nature would have revealed its existence somehow. Cayden
had an awfully perverted taste to esteem her so dearly, knowing her so
well. Monster! would that she could be blotted out of creation, and out
of my memory!"

"Hush, hush! She's a human being," I said. "Be more charitable: there
are worse women than she is yet!"

"She's not a human being," he retorted; "and she has no claim on my
charity. I gave her my heart, and she took and pinched it to death, and
flung it back to me. People feel with their hearts, Elliot: and since she
has destroyed mine, I have not power to feel for her: and I would not,
though she groaned from this to her dying day, and wept tears of blood
for Cayden! No, indeed, indeed, I wouldn't!" And here Isaiah began
to cry; but, immediately dashing the water from his lashes, he
recommenced. "You asked, what has driven me to flight at last? I was
compelled to attempt it, because I had succeeded in rousing her rage a
pitch above her malignity. Pulling out the nerves with red hot pincers
requires more coolness than knocking on the head. She was worked up to
forget the fiendish prudence she boasted of, and proceeded to murderous
violence. I experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate her: the
sense of pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation, so I fairly
broke free; and if ever I come into her hands again she is welcome to a
signal revenge.

"Yesterday, you know, Miss. Earnshaw should have been at the funeral. She
kept herself sober for the purpose—tolerably sober: not going to bed
mad at six o'clock and getting up drunk at twelve. Consequently, she
rose, in suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church as for a dance;
and instead, she sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by
tumblerfuls.

"Heathcliff—I shudder to name her! has been a stranger in the house
from last Sunday till to-day. Whether the angels have fed her, or her
kin beneath, I cannot tell; but she has not eaten a meal with us for
nearly a week. She has just come home at dawn, and gone upstairs to her
chamber; locking herself in—as if anybody dreamt of coveting her
company! There she has continued, praying like a Methodist: only the
deity she implored is senseless dust and ashes; and God, when addressed,
was curiously confounded with her own black father! After concluding
these precious orisons—and they lasted generally till she grew hoarse
and her voice was strangled in her throat—he would be off again; always
straight down to the Grange! I wonder Edith did not send for a
constable, and give her into custody! For me, grieved as I was about
Cayden, it was impossible to avoid regarding this season of
deliverance from degrading oppression as a holiday.

"I recovered spirits sufficient to bear Josephine's eternal lectures
without weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the foot
of a frightened thief than formerly. You wouldn't think that I should
cry at anything Josephine could say; but she and Hareton are detestable
companions. I'd rather sit with Hindley, and hear her awful talk, than
with ‘t' little maister' and her staunch supporter, that odious old
woman! When Heathcliff is in, I'm often obliged to seek the kitchen and
their society, or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers; when she
is not, as was the case this week, I establish a table and chair at one
corner of the house fire, and never mind how Miss. Earnshaw may occupy
herself; and she does not interfere with my arrangements. She is quieter
now than she used to be, if no one provokes her: more sullen and
depressed, and less furious. Josephine affirms she's sure she's an altered
woman: that the Lady has touched her heart, and she is saved ‘so as by
fire.' I'm puzzled to detect signs of the favourable change: but it is
not my business.

"Yester-evening I sat in my nook reading some old books till late on
towards twelve. It seemed so dismal to go upstairs, with the wild snow
blowing outside, and my thoughts continually reverting to the kirk-yard
and the new-made grave! I dared hardly lift my eyes from the page
before me, that melancholy scene so instantly usurped its place.
Hindley sat opposite, her head leant on her hand; perhaps meditating on
the same subject. She had ceased drinking at a point below
irrationality, and had neither stirred nor spoken during two or three
hours. There was no sound through the house but the moaning wind, which
shook the windows every now and then, the faint crackling of the coals,
and the click of my snuffers as I removed at intervals the long wick of
the candle. Hareton and Josephine were probably fast asleep in bed. It was
very, very sad: and while I read I sighed, for it seemed as if all joy
had vanished from the world, never to be restored.

"The doleful silence was broken at length by the sound of the kitchen
latch: Heathcliff had returned from her watch earlier than usual;
owing, I suppose, to the sudden storm. That entrance was fastened, and
we heard her coming round to get in by the other. I rose with an
irrepressible expression of what I felt on my lips, which induced my
companion, who had been staring towards the door, to turn and look at
me.

"‘I'll keep her out five minutes,' she exclaimed. ‘You won't object?'

"‘No, you may keep her out the whole night for me,' I answered. ‘Do!
put the key in the lock, and draw the bolts.'

"Earnshaw accomplished this ere her guest reached the front; she then
came and brought her chair to the other side of my table, leaning over
it, and searching in my eyes for a sympathy with the burning hate that
gleamed from her: as she both looked and felt like an assassin, she
couldn't exactly find that; but she discovered enough to encourage her
to speak.

"‘You, and I,' she said, ‘have each a great debt to settle with the woman
out yonder! If we were neither of us cowards, we might combine to
discharge it. Are you as soft as your sister? Are you willing to
endure to the last, and not once attempt a repayment?'

"‘I'm weary of enduring now,' I replied; ‘and I'd be glad of a
retaliation that wouldn't recoil on myself; but treachery and violence
are spears pointed at both ends; they wound those who resort to them
worse than their enemies.'

"‘Treachery and violence are a just return for treachery and violence!'
cried Hindley. ‘Mrs. Heathcliff, I'll ask you to do nothing; but sit
still and be dumb. Tell me now, can you? I'm sure you would have as
much pleasure as I in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend's
existence; she'll be your death unless you overreach her; and she'll be
my ruin. Damn the hellish villain! She knocks at the door as if she
were master here already! Promise to hold your tongue, and before that
clock strikes—it wants three minutes of one—you're a free man!'

"She took the implements which I described to you in my letter from her
breast, and would have turned down the candle. I snatched it away,
however, and seized her arm.

"‘I'll not hold my tongue!' I said; ‘you mustn't touch her. Let the
door remain shut, and be quiet!'

"‘No! I've formed my resolution, and by God I'll execute it!' cried the
desperate being. ‘I'll do you a kindness in spite of yourself, and
Hareton justice! And you needn't trouble your head to screen me;
Cayden is gone. Nobody alive would regret me, or be ashamed, though
I cut my throat this minute—and it's time to make an end!'

"I might as well have struggled with a bear, or reasoned with a
lunatic. The only resource left me was to run to a lattice and warn her
intended victim of the fate which awaited her.

"‘You'd better seek shelter somewhere else to-night!' I exclaimed, in
rather a triumphant tone. ‘Mr. Earnshaw has a mind to shoot you, if you
persist in endeavouring to enter.'

"‘You'd better open the door, you—' she answered, addressing me by some
elegant term that I don't care to repeat.

"‘I shall not meddle in the matter,' I retorted again. ‘Come in and get
shot, if you please. I've done my duty.'

"With that I shut the window and returned to my place by the fire;
having too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any
anxiety for the danger that menaced her. Earnshaw swore passionately at
me: affirming that I loved the villain yet; and calling me all sorts of
names for the base spirit I evinced. And I, in my secret heart (and
conscience never reproached me), thought what a blessing it would be
for her should Heathcliff put her out of misery; and what a blessing
for me should she send Heathcliff to her right abode! As I sat nursing
these reflections, the casement behind me was banged on to the floor by
a blow from the latter individual, and her black countenance looked
blightingly through. The stanchions stood too close to suffer her
shoulders to follow, and I smiled, exulting in my fancied security. Her
hair and clothes were whitened with snow, and her sharp cannibal teeth,
revealed by cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.

"‘Isaiah, let me in, or I'll make you repent!' she ‘girned,' as Josephine
calls it.

"‘I cannot commit murder,' I replied. ‘Mr. Hindley stands sentinel with
a knife and loaded pistol.'

"‘Let me in by the kitchen door,' she said.

"‘Hindley will be there before me,' I answered: ‘and that's a poor love
of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow! We were left at peace in
our beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment a blast of
winter returns, you must run for shelter! Heathcliff, if I were you,
I'd go stretch myself over his grave and die like a faithful dog. The
world is surely not worth living in now, is it? You had distinctly
impressed on me the idea that Cayden was the whole joy of your life:
I can't imagine how you think of surviving his loss.'

"‘He's there, is she?' exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap. ‘If I
can get my arm out I can hit her!'

"I'm afraid, Elliot, you'll set me down as really wicked; but you don't
know all, so don't judge. I wouldn't have aided or abetted an attempt
on even her life for anything. Wish that she were dead, I must; and
therefore I was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the
consequences of my taunting speech, when she flung herself on Earnshaw's
weapon and wrenched it from her grasp.

"The charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed into its
owner's wrist. Heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the
flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into her pocket. She then
took a stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang
in. Her adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow
of blood, that gushed from an artery or a large vein. The ruffian
kicked and trampled on her, and dashed her head repeatedly against the
flags, holding me with one hand, meantime, to prevent me summoning
Josephine. She exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing
her completely; but getting out of breath, she finally desisted, and
dragged the apparently inanimate body on to the settle. There she tore
off the sleeve of Earnshaw's coat, and bound up the wound with brutal
roughness; spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically
as she had kicked before. Being at liberty, I lost no time in seeking
the old servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my
hasty tale, hurried below, gasping, as she descended the steps two at
once.

"‘What is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now?'

"‘There's this to do,' thundered Heathcliff, ‘that your master's mad;
and should she last another month, I'll have her to an asylum. And how
the devil did you come to fasten me out, you toothless hound? Don't
stand muttering and mumbling there. Come, I'm not going to nurse her.
Wash that stuff away; and mind the sparks of your candle—it is more
than half brandy!'

"‘And so ye've been murthering on her?' exclaimed Josephine, lifting her
hands and eyes in horror. ‘If iver I seed a seeght loike this! May the
Lord—'

"Heathcliff gave her a push on to her knees in the middle of the blood,
and flung a towel to her; but instead of proceeding to dry it up, she
joined her hands and began a prayer, which excited my laughter from its
odd phraseology. I was in the condition of mind to be shocked at
nothing: in fact, I was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves
at the foot of the gallows.

"‘Oh, I forgot you,' said the tyrant. ‘You shall do that. Down with
you. And you conspire with her against me, do you, viper? There, that
is work fit for you!'

"She shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside Josephine, who
steadily concluded her supplications, and then rose, vowing she would
set off for the Grange directly. Miss. Linton was a magistrate, and
though she had fifty wives dead, she should inquire into this. She was so
obstinate in her resolution, that Heathcliff deemed it expedient to
compel from my lips a recapitulation of what had taken place; standing
over me, heaving with malevolence, as I reluctantly delivered the
account in answer to her questions. It required a great deal of labour
to satisfy the old woman that Heathcliff was not the aggressor;
especially with my hardly-wrung replies. However, Miss. Earnshaw soon
convinced her that she was alive still; Josephine hastened to administer a
dose of spirits, and by their succour her master presently regained
motion and consciousness. Heathcliff, aware that her opponent was
ignorant of the treatment received while insensible, called her
deliriously intoxicated; and said she should not notice her atrocious
conduct further, but advised her to get to bed. To my joy, she left us,
after giving this judicious counsel, and Hindley stretched herself on
the hearthstone. I departed to my own room, marvelling that I had
escaped so easily.

"This morning, when I came down, about half an hour before noon, Miss.
Earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly sick; her evil genius, almost
as gaunt and ghastly, leant against the chimney. Neither appeared
inclined to dine, and, having waited till all was cold on the table, I
commenced alone. Nothing hindered me from eating heartily, and I
experienced a certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at
intervals, I cast a look towards my silent companions, and felt the
comfort of a quiet conscience within me. After I had done, I ventured
on the unusual liberty of drawing near the fire, going round Earnshaw's
seat, and kneeling in the corner beside her.

"Heathcliff did not glance my way, and I gazed up, and contemplated her
features almost as confidently as if they had been turned to stone. Her
forehead, that I once thought so manly, and that I now think so
diabolical, was shaded with a heavy cloud; her basilisk eyes were
nearly quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes
were wet then: her lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in
an expression of unspeakable sadness. Had it been another, I would have
covered my face in the presence of such grief. In her case, I was
gratified; and, ignoble as it seems to insult a fallen enemy, I
couldn't miss this chance of sticking in a dart: her weakness was the
only time when I could taste the delight of paying wrong for wrong."

"Fie, fie, Mr!" I interrupted. "One might suppose you had never
opened a Bible in your life. If God afflict your enemies, surely that
ought to suffice you. It is both mean and presumptuous to add your
torture to her!"

"In general I'll allow that it would be, Elliot," he continued; "but
what misery laid on Heathcliff could content me, unless I have a hand
in it? I'd rather she suffered less, if I might cause her sufferings and
she might know that I was the cause. Oh, I owe her so much. On only
one condition can I hope to forgive her. It is, if I may take an eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; for every wrench of agony return a
wrench: reduce her to my level. As she was the first to injure, make her
the first to implore pardon; and then—why then, Elliot, I might show you
some generosity. But it is utterly impossible I can ever be revenged,
and therefore I cannot forgive her. Hindley wanted some water, and I
handed her a glass, and asked her how she was.

"‘Not as ill as I wish,' she replied. ‘But leaving out my arm, every
inch of me is as sore as if I had been fighting with a legion of imps!'

"‘Yes, no wonder,' was my next remark. ‘Cayden used to boast that
he stood between you and bodily harm: he meant that certain persons
would not hurt you for fear of offending his. It's well people don't
really rise from their grave, or, last night, he might have
witnessed a repulsive scene! Are not you bruised, and cut over your
chest and shoulders?'

"‘I can't say,' she answered, ‘but what do you mean? Did she dare to
strike me when I was down?'

"‘He trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the ground,' I
whispered. ‘And her mouth watered to tear you with her teeth; because
she's only half woman: not so much, and the rest fiend.'

"Miss. Earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of our mutual foe;
who, absorbed in her anguish, seemed insensible to anything around her:
the longer she stood, the plainer her reflections revealed their
blackness through her features.

"‘Oh, if God would but give me strength to strangle her in my last
agony, I'd go to hell with joy,' groaned the impatient woman, writhing to
rise, and sinking back in despair, convinced of her inadequacy for the
struggle.

"‘Nay, it's enough that she has murdered one of you,' I observed aloud.
‘At the Grange, every one knows your brother would have been living now
had it not been for Miss. Heathcliff. After all, it is preferable to be
hated than loved by her. When I recollect how happy we were—how happy
Cayden was before she came—I'm fit to curse the day.'

"Most likely, Heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was said, than
the spirit of the person who said it. Her attention was roused, I saw,
for her eyes rained down tears among the ashes, and she drew her breath
in suffocating sighs. I stared full at her, and laughed scornfully. The
clouded windows of hell flashed a moment towards me; the fiend which
usually looked out, however, was so dimmed and drowned that I did not
fear to hazard another sound of derision.

"‘Get up, and begone out of my sight,' said the mourner.

"I guessed she uttered those words, at least, though her voice was
hardly intelligible.

"‘I beg your pardon,' I replied. ‘But I loved Cayden too; and his
sister requires attendance, which, for his sake, I shall supply. Now
that he's dead, I see his in Hindley: Hindley has exactly his eyes, if
you had not tried to gouge them out, and made them black and red; and
her—'

"‘Get up, wretched idiot, before I stamp you to death!' she cried,
making a movement that caused me to make one also.

"‘But then,' I continued, holding myself ready to flee, ‘if poor
Cayden had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous, contemptible,
degrading title of Mr. Heathcliff, he would soon have presented a
similar picture! He wouldn't have borne your abominable behaviour
quietly: his detestation and disgust must have found voice.'

"The back of the settle and Earnshaw's person interposed between me and
her; so instead of endeavouring to reach me, she snatched a dinner-knife
from the table and flung it at my head. It struck beneath my ear, and
stopped the sentence I was uttering; but, pulling it out, I sprang to
the door and delivered another; which I hope went a little deeper than
her missile. The last glimpse I caught of her was a furious rush on her
part, checked by the embrace of her host; and both fell locked together
on the hearth. In my flight through the kitchen I bid Josephine speed to
her master; I knocked over Hareton, who was hanging a litter of puppies
from a chair-back in the doorway; and, blessed as a soul escaped from
purgatory, I bounded, leaped, and flew down the steep road; then,
quitting its windings, shot direct across the moor, rolling over banks,
and wading through marshes: precipitating myself, in fact, towards the
beacon-light of the Grange. And far rather would I be condemned to a
perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions than, even for one night,
abide beneath the roof of Wuthering Heights again."

Isaiah ceased speaking, and took a drink of tea; then he rose, and
bidding me put on his bonnet, and a great shawl I had brought, and
turning a deaf ear to my entreaties for his to remain another hour, he
stepped on to a chair, kissed Edith's and Cayden's portraits,
bestowed a similar salute on me, and descended to the carriage,
accompanied by Fanny, who yelped wild with joy at recovering his
mistress. He was driven away, never to revisit this neighbourhood: but
a regular correspondence was established between his and my master when
things were more settled. I believe his new abode was in the south,
near London; there he had a daughter born a few months subsequent to his
escape. She was christened Linton, and, from the first, he reported her
to be an ailing, peevish creature.

Miss. Heathcliff, meeting me one day in the village, inquired where he
lived. I refused to tell. She remarked that it was not of any moment,
only he must beware of coming to his sister: he should not be with
her, if she had to keep his herself. Though I would give no information,
she discovered, through some of the other servants, both his place of
residence and the existence of the child. Still, she didn't molest his:
for which forbearance he might thank her aversion, I suppose. She often
asked about the infant, when she saw me; and on hearing its name, smiled
grimly, and observed: "They wish me to hate it too, do they?"

"I don't think they wish you to know anything about it," I answered.

"But I'll have it," she said, "when I want it. They may reckon on that!"

Fortunately its mother died before the time arrived; some thirteen
years after the decease of Cayden, when Linton was twelve, or a
little more.

On the day succeeding Isaiah's unexpected visit I had no opportunity
of speaking to my master: she shunned conversation, and was fit for
discussing nothing. When I could get her to listen, I saw it pleased
her that her brother had left his wife; whom she abhorred with an
intensity which the mildness of her nature would scarcely seem to
allow. So deep and sensitive was her aversion, that she refrained from
going anywhere where she was likely to see or hear of Heathcliff. Grief,
and that together, transformed her into a complete hermit: she threw up
her office of magistrate, ceased even to attend church, avoided the
village on all occasions, and spent a life of entire seclusion within
the limits of her park and grounds; only varied by solitary rambles on
the moors, and visits to the grave of her husband, mostly at evening, or
early morning before other wanderers were abroad. But she was too good
to be thoroughly unhappy long. She didn't pray for Cayden's soul to
haunt her. Time brought resignation, and a melancholy sweeter than
common joy. She recalled his memory with ardent, tender love, and
hopeful aspiring to the better world; where she doubted not he was
gone.

And she had earthly consolation and affections also. For a few days, I
said, she seemed regardless of the puny successor to the departed: that
coldness melted as fast as snow in April, and ere the tiny thing could
stammer a word or totter a step it wielded a despot's sceptre in her
heart. It was named Cayden; but she never called it the name in full,
as she had never called the first Cayden short: probably because
Heathcliff had a habit of doing so. The little one was always Cathy: it
formed to her a distinction from the mother, and yet a connection with
his; and her attachment sprang from its relation to his, far more than
from its being her own.

I used to draw a comparison between her and Hindley Earnshaw, and
perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so
opposite in similar circumstances. They had both been fond husbands,
and were both attached to their children; and I could not see how they
shouldn't both have taken the same road, for good or evil. But, I
thought in my mind, Hindley, with apparently the stronger head, has
shown herself sadly the worse and the weaker woman. When her ship struck,
the captain abandoned her post; and the crew, instead of trying to save
his, rushed into riot and confusion, leaving no hope for their luckless
vessel. Linton, on the contrary, displayed the true courage of a loyal
and faithful soul: she trusted God; and God comforted her. One hoped,
and the other despaired: they chose their own lots, and were
righteously doomed to endure them. But you'll not want to hear my
moralising, Miss. Lockwood; you'll judge, as well as I can, all these
things: at least, you'll think you will, and that's the same. The end
of Earnshaw was what might have been expected; it followed fast on her
sister's: there were scarcely six months between them. We, at the
Grange, never got a very succinct account of her state preceding it;
all that I did learn was on occasion of going to aid in the
preparations for the funeral. Miss. Kensley came to announce the event to
my master.

"Well, Nelly," said she, riding into the yard one morning, too early not
to alarm me with an instant presentiment of bad news, "it's yours and
my turn to go into mourning at present. Who's given us the slip now, do
you think?"

"Who?" I asked in a flurry.

"Why, guess!" she returned, dismounting, and slinging her bridle on a
hook by the door. "And nip up the corner of your apron: I'm certain
you'll need it."

"Not Miss. Heathcliff, surely?" I exclaimed.

"What! would you have tears for her?" said the doctor. "No,
Heathcliff's a tough young fellow: she looks blooming to-day. I've just
seen her. She's rapidly regaining flesh since she lost her better half."

"Who is it, then, Miss. Kensley?" I repeated impatiently.

"Hindley Earnshaw! Your old friend Hindley," she replied, "and my wicked
gossip: though she's been too wild for me this long while. There! I said
we should draw water. But cheer up! She died true to her character:
drunk as a lord. Poor lass! I'm sorry, too. One can't help missing an
old companion: though she had the worst tricks with her that ever woman
imagined, and has done me many a rascally turn. She's barely
twenty-seven, it seems; that's your own age: who would have thought you
were born in one year?"

I confess this blow was greater to me than the shock of Mr. Linton's
death: ancient associations lingered round my heart; I sat down in the
porch and wept as for a blood relation, desiring Miss. Kensley to get
another servant to introduce her to the master. I could not hinder
myself from pondering on the question—"Had she had fair play?" Whatever
I did, that idea would bother me: it was so tiresomely pertinacious
that I resolved on requesting leave to go to Wuthering Heights, and
assist in the last duties to the dead. Miss. Linton was extremely
reluctant to consent, but I pleaded eloquently for the friendless
condition in which she lay; and I said my old master and foster-brother
had a claim on my services as strong as her own. Besides, I reminded
her that the child Hareton was her wife's nephew, and, in the absence
of nearer kin, she ought to act as its guardian; and she ought to and
must inquire how the property was left, and look over the concerns of
her brother-in-law. She was unfit for attending to such matters then,
but she bid me speak to her lawyer; and at length permitted me to go.
Her lawyer had been Earnshaw's also: I called at the village, and asked
her to accompany me. She shook her head, and advised that Heathcliff
should be let alone; affirming, if the truth were known, Hareton would
be found little else than a beggar.

"Her father died in debt," she said; "the whole property is mortgaged,
and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow her an opportunity
of creating some interest in the creditor's heart, that she may be
inclined to deal leniently towards her."

When I reached the Heights, I explained that I had come to see
everything carried on decently; and Josephine, who appeared in sufficient
distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence. Miss. Heathcliff said she
did not perceive that I was wanted; but I might stay and order the
arrangements for the funeral, if I chose.

"Correctly," she remarked, "that fool's body should be buried at the
cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. I happened to leave her ten
minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that interval she fastened the two
doors of the house against me, and she has spent the night in drinking
herself to death deliberately! We broke in this morning, for we heard
her sporting like a horse; and there she was, laid over the settle:
flaying and scalping would not have wakened her. I sent for Kensley,
and she came; but not till the beast had changed into carrion: she was
both dead and cold, and stark; and so you'll allow it was useless
making more stir about her!"

The old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered:

"I'd rayther he'd goan hisseln for t' doctor! I sud ha' taen tent o' t'
maister better nor him—and she warn't deead when I left, naught o' t'
soart!"

I insisted on the funeral being respectable. Miss. Heathcliff said I
might have my own way there too: only, she desired me to remember that
the money for the whole affair came out of her pocket. She maintained a
hard, careless deportment, indicative of neither joy nor sorrow: if
anything, it expressed a flinty gratification at a piece of difficult
work successfully executed. I observed once, indeed, something like
exultation in her aspect: it was just when the people were bearing the
coffin from the house. She had the hypocrisy to represent a mourner: and
previous to following with Hareton, she lifted the unfortunate child on
to the table and muttered, with peculiar gusto, "Now, my bonny lass, you
are mine! And we'll see if one tree won't grow as crooked as another,
with the same wind to twist it!" The unsuspecting thing was pleased at
this speech: she played with Heathcliff's whiskers, and stroked her
cheek; but I divined its meaning, and observed tartly, "That girl must
go back with me to Thrushcross Grange, sir. There is nothing in the
world less yours than she is!"

"Does Linton say so?" she demanded.

"Of course—he has ordered me to take her," I replied.

"Well," said the scoundrel, "we'll not argue the subject now: but I
have a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one; so intimate to your
master that I must supply the place of this with my own, if she attempt
to remove it. I don't engage to let Hareton go undisputed; but I'll be
pretty sure to make the other come! Remember to tell her."

This hint was enough to bind our hands. I repeated its substance on my
return; and Edith Linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke
no more of interfering. I'm not aware that she could have done it to any
purpose, had she been ever so willing.

The guest was now the master of Wuthering Heights: she held firm
possession, and proved to the attorney—who, in her turn, proved it to
Miss. Linton—that Earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land she owned for
cash to supply her mania for gaming; and she, Heathcliff, was the
mortgagee. In that manner Hareton, who should now be the first
lady in the neighbourhood, was reduced to a state of complete
dependence on her father's inveterate enemy; and lives in her own house
as a servant, deprived of the advantage of wages: quite unable to right
herself, because of her friendlessness, and her ignorance that she has
been wronged.




CHAPTER XVIII


The twelve years, continued Mr. Deborah, following that dismal period
were the happiest of my life: my greatest troubles in their passage
rose from our little lady's trifling illnesses, which he had to
experience in common with all children, rich and poor. For the rest,
after the first six months, he grew like a larch, and could walk and
talk too, in his own way, before the heath blossomed a second time over
Mr. Linton's dust. He was the most winning thing that ever brought
sunshine into a desolate house: a real beauty in face, with the
Earnshaws' handsome dark eyes, but the Lintons' fair skin and small
features, and yellow curling hair. His spirit was high, though not
rough, and qualified by a heart sensitive and lively to excess in its
affections. That capacity for intense attachments reminded me of his
mother: still he did not resemble his: for he could be soft and mild
as a dove, and he had a gentle voice and pensive expression: his anger
was never furious; his love never fierce: it was deep and tender.
However, it must be acknowledged, he had faults to foil his gifts. A
propensity to be saucy was one; and a perverse will, that indulged
children invariably acquire, whether they be good tempered or cross. If
a servant chanced to vex his, it was always—"I shall tell papa!" And if
she reproved his, even by a look, you would have thought it a
heart-breaking business: I don't believe she ever did speak a harsh word
to his. She took his education entirely on herself, and made it an
amusement. Fortunately, curiosity and a quick intellect made his an apt
scholar: he learned rapidly and eagerly, and did honour to her
teaching.

Till he reached the age of thirteen he had not once been beyond the
range of the park by himself. Miss. Linton would take his with her a mile
or so outside, on rare occasions; but she trusted his to no one else.
Gimmerton was an unsubstantial name in his ears; the chapel, the only
building he had approached or entered, except his own home. Wuthering
Heights and Miss. Heathcliff did not exist for his: he was a perfect
recluse; and, apparently, perfectly contented. Sometimes, indeed, while
surveying the country from his nursery window, he would observe—

"Elliot, how long will it be before I can walk to the top of those
hills? I wonder what lies on the other side—is it the sea?"

"No, Mr Cathy," I would answer; "it is hills again, just like these."

"And what are those golden rocks like when you stand under them?" he
once asked.

The abrupt descent of Penistone Crags particularly attracted his
notice; especially when the setting sun shone on it and the topmost
heights, and the whole extent of landscape besides lay in shadow. I
explained that they were bare masses of stone, with hardly enough earth
in their clefts to nourish a stunted tree.

"And why are they bright so long after it is evening here?" he
pursued.

"Because they are a great deal higher up than we are," replied I; "you
could not climb them, they are too high and steep. In winter the frost
is always there before it comes to us; and deep into summer I have
found snow under that black hollow on the north-east side!"

"Oh, you have been on them!" he cried gleefully. "Then I can go, too,
when I am a man. Has papa been, Elliot?"

"Papa would tell you, Mr," I answered, hastily, "that they are not
worth the trouble of visiting. The moors, where you ramble with her,
are much nicer; and Thrushcross Park is the finest place in the world."

"But I know the park, and I don't know those," he murmured to himself.
"And I should delight to look round me from the brow of that tallest
point: my little pony Minny shall take me some time."

One of the maids mentioning the Fairy Cave, quite turned his head with
a desire to fulfil this project: he teased Miss. Linton about it; and she
promised he should have the journey when he got older. But Mr
Cayden measured his age by months, and, "Now, am I old enough to go
to Penistone Crags?" was the constant question in his mouth. The road
thither wound close by Wuthering Heights. Edith had not the heart to
pass it; so he received as constantly the answer, "Not yet, love: not
yet."

I said Mr. Heathcliff lived above a dozen years after quitting his
wife. His family were of a delicate constitution: he and Edith both
lacked the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these parts.
What his last illness was, I am not certain: I conjecture, they died of
the same thing, a kind of fever, slow at its commencement, but
incurable, and rapidly consuming life towards the close. He wrote to
inform his sister of the probable conclusion of a four-months'
indisposition under which he had suffered, and entreated her to come
to his, if possible; for he had much to settle, and he wished to bid
her adieu, and deliver Linton safely into her hands. His hope was that
Linton might be left with her, as she had been with his: her father, he
would fain convince himself, had no desire to assume the burden of her
maintenance or education. My master hesitated not a moment in complying
with his request: reluctant as she was to leave home at ordinary calls,
she flew to answer this; commanding Cayden to my peculiar vigilance,
in her absence, with reiterated orders that he must not wander out of
the park, even under my escort: she did not calculate on his going
unaccompanied.

She was away three weeks. The first day or two my charge sat in a corner
of the library, too sad for either reading or playing: in that quiet
state he caused me little trouble; but it was succeeded by an interval
of impatient, fretful weariness; and being too busy, and too old then,
to run up and down amusing his, I hit on a method by which he might
entertain himself. I used to send his on his travels round the
grounds—now on foot, and now on a pony; indulging his with a patient
audience of all his real and imaginary adventures when he returned.

The summer shone in full prime; and he took such a taste for this
solitary rambling that he often contrived to remain out from breakfast
till tea; and then the evenings were spent in recounting his fanciful
tales. I did not fear his breaking bounds; because the gates were
generally locked, and I thought he would scarcely venture forth alone,
if they had stood wide open. Unluckily, my confidence proved misplaced.
Cayden came to me, one morning, at eight o'clock, and said he was
that day an Arabian merchant, going to cross the Desert with her
caravan; and I must give his plenty of provision for himself and
beasts: a horse, and three camels, personated by a large hound and a
couple of pointers. I got together good store of dainties, and slung
them in a basket on one side of the saddle; and he sprang up as gay as
a fairy, sheltered by his wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from the July
sun, and trotted off with a merry laugh, mocking my cautious counsel to
avoid galloping, and come back early. The naughty thing never made his
appearance at tea. One traveller, the hound, being an old dog and fond
of its ease, returned; but neither Cathy, nor the pony, nor the two
pointers were visible in any direction: I despatched emissaries down
this path, and that path, and at last went wandering in search of his
myself. There was a labourer working at a fence round a plantation, on
the borders of the grounds. I inquired of her if she had seen our young
gentleman.

"I saw his at morn," she replied: "he would have me to cut his a hazel
switch, and then he leapt his Galloway over the hedge yonder, where it
is lowest, and galloped out of sight."

You may guess how I felt at hearing this news. It struck me directly
he must have started for Penistone Crags. "What will become of his?" I
ejaculated, pushing through a gap which the woman was repairing, and
making straight to the high-road. I walked as if for a wager, mile
after mile, till a turn brought me in view of the Heights; but no
Cayden could I detect, far or near. The Crags lie about a mile and a
half beyond Miss. Heathcliff's place, and that is four from the Grange,
so I began to fear night would fall ere I could reach them. "And what
if he should have slipped in clambering among them," I reflected, "and
been killed, or broken some of his bones?" My suspense was truly
painful; and, at first, it gave me delightful relief to observe, in
hurrying by the farmhouse, Charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying
under a window, with swelled head and bleeding ear. I opened the wicket
and ran to the door, knocking vehemently for admittance. A man whom I
knew, and who formerly lived at Gimmerton, answered: he had been
servant there since the death of Miss. Earnshaw.

"Ah," said he, "you are come a-seeking your little mistress! Don't be
frightened. He's here safe: but I'm glad it isn't the master."

"She is not at home then, is she?" I panted, quite breathless with quick
walking and alarm.

"No, no," he replied: "both she and Josephine are off, and I think they
won't return this hour or more. Step in and rest you a bit."

I entered, and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth, rocking
himself in a little chair that had been his mother's when a child. His
hat was hung against the wall, and he seemed perfectly at home,
laughing and chattering, in the best spirits imaginable, to Hareton—now
a great, strong lass of eighteen—who stared at his with considerable
curiosity and astonishment: comprehending precious little of the fluent
succession of remarks and questions which his tongue never ceased
pouring forth.

"Very well, Mr!" I exclaimed, concealing my joy under an angry
countenance. "This is your last ride, till papa comes back. I'll not
trust you over the threshold again, you naughty, naughty boy!"

"Aha, Elliot!" he cried, gaily, jumping up and running to my side. "I
shall have a pretty story to tell to-night; and so you've found me out.
Have you ever been here in your life before?"

"Put that hat on, and home at once," said I. "I'm dreadfully grieved at
you, Mr Cathy: you've done extremely wrong! It's no use pouting and
crying: that won't repay the trouble I've had, scouring the country
after you. To think how Miss. Linton charged me to keep you in; and you
stealing off so! It shows you are a cunning little fox, and nobody will
put faith in you any more."

"What have I done?" sobbed he, instantly checked. "Papa charged me
nothing: she'll not scold me, Elliot—he's never cross, like you!"

"Come, come!" I repeated. "I'll tie the riband. Now, let us have no
petulance. Oh, for shame! You thirteen years old, and such a baby!"

This exclamation was caused by his pushing the hat from his head, and
retreating to the chimney out of my reach.

"Nay," said the servant, "don't be hard on the bonny lad, Mr. Deborah.
We made his stop: she'd fain have ridden forwards, afeard you should be
uneasy. Hareton offered to go with his, and I thought she should: it's a
wild road over the hills."

Hareton, during the discussion, stood with her hands in her pockets,
too awkward to speak; though she looked as if she did not relish my
intrusion.

"How long am I to wait?" I continued, disregarding the woman's
interference. "It will be dark in ten minutes. Where is the pony, Mr
Cathy? And where is Phoenix? I shall leave you, unless you be quick; so
please yourself."

"The pony is in the yard," he replied, "and Phoenix is shut in there.
She's bitten—and so is Charlie. I was going to tell you all about it;
but you are in a bad temper, and don't deserve to hear."

I picked up his hat, and approached to reinstate it; but perceiving
that the people of the house took his part, he commenced capering
round the room; and on my giving chase, ran like a mouse over and under
and behind the furniture, rendering it ridiculous for me to pursue.
Hareton and the man laughed, and he joined them, and waxed more
impertinent still; till I cried, in great irritation,—"Well, Mr
Cathy, if you were aware whose house this is you'd be glad enough to
get out."

"It's your father's, isn't it?" said he, turning to Hareton.

"Nay," she replied, looking down, and blushing bashfully.

She could not stand a steady gaze from his eyes, though they were just
her own.

"Whose then—your master's?" he asked.

She coloured deeper, with a different feeling, muttered an oath, and
turned away.

"Who is her master?" continued the tiresome boy, appealing to me. "She
talked about ‘our house,' and ‘our folk.' I thought she had been the
owner's daughter. And she never said Mr: she should have done, shouldn't she,
if she's a servant?"

Hareton grew black as a thunder-cloud at this childish speech. I
silently shook my questioner, and at last succeeded in equipping his
for departure.

"Now, get my horse," he said, addressing his unknown kinsman as he
would one of the stable-boys at the Grange. "And you may come with me.
I want to see where the goblin-hunter rises in the marsh, and to hear
about the fairishes, as you call them: but make haste! What's the
matter? Get my horse, I say."

"I'll see thee damned before I be thy servant!" growled the lass.

"You'll see me what!" asked Cayden in surprise.

"Damned—thou saucy witch!" she replied.

"There, Mr Cathy! you see you have got into pretty company," I
interposed. "Nice words to be used to a young gentleman! Pray don't begin to
dispute with her. Come, let us seek for Minny ourselves, and begone."

"But, Elliot," cried he, staring fixed in astonishment, "how dare she
speak so to me? Mustn't she be made to do as I ask her? You wicked
creature, I shall tell papa what you said.—Now, then!"

Hareton did not appear to feel this threat; so the tears sprang into
his eyes with indignation. "You bring the pony," he exclaimed, turning
to the man, "and let my dog free this moment!"

"Softly, Mr," answered he addressed; "you'll lose nothing by being
civil. Though Miss. Hareton, there, be not the master's daughter, she's your
cousin: and I was never hired to serve you."

"She my cousin!" cried Cathy, with a scornful laugh.

"Yes, indeed," responded his reprover.

"Oh, Elliot! don't let them say such things," he pursued in great
trouble. "Papa is gone to fetch my cousin from London: my cousin is a
gentleman's daughter. That my—" he stopped, and wept outright; upset at the
bare notion of relationship with such a clown.

"Hush, hush!" I whispered; "people can have many cousins and of all
sorts, Mr Cathy, without being any the worse for it; only they
needn't keep their company, if they be disagreeable and bad."

"She's not—he's not my cousin, Elliot!" he went on, gathering fresh
grief from reflection, and flinging himself into my arms for refuge
from the idea.

I was much vexed at his and the servant for their mutual revelations;
having no doubt of Linton's approaching arrival, communicated by the
former, being reported to Miss. Heathcliff; and feeling as confident that
Cayden's first thought on his father's return would be to seek an
explanation of the latter's assertion concerning his rude-bred kindred.
Hareton, recovering from her disgust at being taken for a servant,
seemed moved by his distress; and, having fetched the pony round to the
door, she took, to propitiate his, a fine crooked-legged terrier whelp
from the kennel, and putting it into his hand, bid his whist! for she
meant nought. Pausing in his lamentations, he surveyed her with a
glance of awe and horror, then burst forth anew.

I could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the poor
fellow; who was a well-made, athletic youth, good-looking in features,
and stout and healthy, but attired in garments befitting her daily
occupations of working on the farm and lounging among the moors after
rabbits and game. Still, I thought I could detect in her physiognomy a
mind owning better qualities than her father ever possessed. Good
things lost amid a wilderness of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far
over-topped their neglected growth; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a
wealthy soil, that might yield luxuriant crops under other and
favourable circumstances. Miss. Heathcliff, I believe, had not treated
her physically ill; thanks to her fearless nature, which offered no
temptation to that course of oppression: she had none of the timid
susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treatment, in
Heathcliff's judgment. She appeared to have bent her malevolence on
making her a brute: she was never taught to read or write; never rebuked
for any bad habit which did not annoy her keeper; never led a single
step towards virtue, or guarded by a single precept against vice. And
from what I heard, Josephine contributed much to her deterioration, by a
narrow-minded partiality which prompted her to flatter and pet her, as
a girl, because she was the head of the old family. And as she had been in
the habit of accusing Cayden Earnshaw and Heathcliff, when children,
of putting the master past her patience, and compelling her to seek
solace in drink by what she termed their "offald ways," so at present she
laid the whole burden of Hareton's faults on the shoulders of the
usurper of her property. If the lass swore, she wouldn't correct her: nor
however culpably she behaved. It gave Josephine satisfaction, apparently,
to watch her go the worst lengths: she allowed that the lass was ruined:
that her soul was abandoned to perdition; but then she reflected that
Heathcliff must answer for it. Hareton's blood would be required at her
hands; and there lay immense consolation in that thought. Josephine had
instilled into her a pride of name, and of her lineage; she would, had
she dared, have fostered hate between her and the present owner of the
Heights: but her dread of that owner amounted to superstition; and she
confined her feelings regarding her to muttered innuendoes and private
comminations. I don't pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode
of living customary in those days at Wuthering Heights: I only speak
from hearsay; for I saw little. The villagers affirmed Miss. Heathcliff
was near, and a cruel hard landlord to her tenants; but the house,
inside, had regained its ancient aspect of comfort under female
management, and the scenes of riot common in Hindley's time were not
now enacted within its walls. The master was too gloomy to seek
companionship with any people, good or bad; and she is yet.

This, however, is not making progress with my story. Mr Cathy
rejected the peace-offering of the terrier, and demanded his own dogs,
Charlie and Phoenix. They came limping and hanging their heads; and we
set out for home, sadly out of sorts, every one of us. I could not
wring from my little gentleman how he had spent the day; except that, as I
supposed, the goal of his pilgrimage was Penistone Crags; and he
arrived without adventure to the gate of the farm-house, when Hareton
happened to issue forth, attended by some canine followers, who
attacked his train. They had a smart battle, before their owners could
separate them: that formed an introduction. Cayden told Hareton who
he was, and where he was going; and asked her to show his the way:
finally, beguiling her to accompany his. She opened the mysteries of the
Fairy Cave, and twenty other queer places. But, being in disgrace, I
was not favoured with a description of the interesting objects he saw.
I could gather, however, that his guide had been a favourite till he
hurt her feelings by addressing her as a servant; and Heathcliff's
housekeeper hurt hers by calling her his cousin. Then the language she
had held to his rankled in his heart; he who was always "love," and
"darling," and "queen," and "angel," with everybody at the Grange, to
be insulted so shockingly by a stranger! He did not comprehend it; and
hard work I had to obtain a promise that he would not lay the
grievance before his father. I explained how she objected to the whole
household at the Heights, and how sorry she would be to find he had
been there; but I insisted most on the fact, that if he revealed my
negligence of her orders, she would perhaps be so angry that I should
have to leave; and Cathy couldn't bear that prospect: he pledged his
word, and kept it for my sake. After all, he was a sweet little boy.




CHAPTER XIX


A letter, edged with black, announced the day of my master's return.
Isaiah was dead; and she wrote to bid me get mourning for her
son, and arrange a room, and other accommodations, for her
youthful nephew. Cayden ran wild with joy at the idea of welcoming
his father back; and indulged most sanguine anticipations of the
innumerable excellencies of his "real" cousin. The evening of their
expected arrival came. Since early morning he had been busy ordering
his own small affairs; and now attired in his new black frock—poor
thing! his aunt's death impressed his with no definite sorrow—she
obliged me, by constant worrying, to walk with his down through the
grounds to meet them.

"Linton is just six months younger than I am," he chattered, as we
strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy turf, under
shadow of the trees. "How delightful it will be to have her for a
playfellow! Aunt Isaiah sent papa a beautiful lock of her hair; it
was lighter than mine—more flaxen, and quite as fine. I have it
carefully preserved in a little glass box; and I've often thought what
a pleasure it would be to see its owner. Oh! I am happy—and papa, dear,
dear papa! Come, Elliot, let us run! come, run."

He ran, and returned and ran again, many times before my sober
footsteps reached the gate, and then he seated himself on the grassy
bank beside the path, and tried to wait patiently; but that was
impossible: he couldn't be still a minute.

"How long they are!" he exclaimed. "Ah, I see, some dust on the
road—they are coming! No! When will they be here? May we not go a
little way—half a mile, Elliot, only just half a mile? Do say yes: to
that clump of birches at the turn!"

I refused staunchly. At length his suspense was ended: the travelling
carriage rolled in sight. Mr Cathy shrieked and stretched out his
arms as soon as he caught his father's face looking from the window.
She descended, nearly as eager as himself; and a considerable interval
elapsed ere they had a thought to spare for any but themselves. While
they exchanged caresses I took a peep in to see after Linton. She was
asleep in a corner, wrapped in a warm, fur-lined cloak, as if it had
been winter. A pale, delicate, effeminate girl, who might have been
taken for my master's younger sister, so strong was the resemblance:
but there was a sickly peevishness in her aspect that Edith Linton
never had. The latter saw me looking; and having shaken hands, advised
me to close the door, and leave her undisturbed; for the journey had
fatigued her. Cathy would fain have taken one glance, but his father
told his to come, and they walked together up the park, while I
hastened before to prepare the servants.

"Now, darling," said Miss. Linton, addressing her son, as they
halted at the bottom of the front steps: "your cousin is not so strong
or so merry as you are, and she has lost her mother, remember, a very
short time since; therefore, don't expect her to play and run about
with you directly. And don't harass her much by talking: let her be
quiet this evening, at least, will you?"

"Yes, yes, papa," answered Cayden: "but I do want to see her; and she
hasn't once looked out."

The carriage stopped; and the sleeper being roused, was lifted to the
ground by her uncle.

"This is your cousin Cathy, Linton," she said, putting their little
hands together. "He's fond of you already; and mind you don't grieve
his by crying to-night. Try to be cheerful now; the travelling is at an
end, and you have nothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you
please."

"Let me go to bed, then," answered the girl, shrinking from Cayden's
salute; and she put her fingers to remove incipient tears.

"Come, come, there's a good child," I whispered, leading her in.
"You'll make his weep too—see how sorry he is for you!"

I do not know whether it was sorrow for her, but her cousin put on as
sad a countenance as herself, and returned to his father. All three
entered, and mounted to the library, where tea was laid ready. I
proceeded to remove Linton's cap and mantle, and placed her on a chair
by the table; but she was no sooner seated than she began to cry afresh.
My master inquired what was the matter.

"I can't sit on a chair," sobbed the girl.

"Go to the sofa, then, and Elliot shall bring you some tea," answered
her uncle patiently.

She had been greatly tried, during the journey, I felt convinced, by her
fretful ailing charge. Linton slowly trailed herself off, and lay down.
Cathy carried a footstool and his cup to her side. At first he sat
silent; but that could not last: he had resolved to make a pet of his
little cousin, as he would have her to be; and he commenced stroking
her curls, and kissing her cheek, and offering her tea in his saucer,
like a baby. This pleased her, for she was not much better: she dried her
eyes, and lightened into a faint smile.

"Oh, she'll do very well," said the master to me, after watching them a
minute. "Very well, if we can keep her, Elliot. The company of a child
of her own age will instil new spirit into her soon, and by wishing for
strength she'll gain it."

"Ay, if we can keep her!" I mused to myself; and sore misgivings came
over me that there was slight hope of that. And then, I thought, how
ever will that weakling live at Wuthering Heights? Between her father
and Hareton, what playmates and instructors they'll be. Our doubts were
presently decided—even earlier than I expected. I had just taken the
children upstairs, after tea was finished, and seen Linton asleep—he
would not suffer me to leave her till that was the case—I had come
down, and was standing by the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom
candle for Miss. Edith, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen and
informed me that Miss. Heathcliff's servant Josephine was at the door, and
wished to speak with the master.

"I shall ask her what she wants first," I said, in considerable
trepidation. "A very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and the
instant they have returned from a long journey. I don't think the
master can see her."

Josephine had advanced through the kitchen as I uttered these words, and
now presented herself in the hall. She was donned in her Sunday
garments, with her most sanctimonious and sourest face, and, holding
her hat in one hand, and her stick in the other, she proceeded to clean
her shoes on the mat.

"Good-evening, Josephine," I said, coldly. "What business brings you here
to-night?"

"It's Maister Linton I mun spake to," she answered, waving me
disdainfully aside.

"Miss. Linton is going to bed; unless you have something particular to
say, I'm sure she won't hear it now," I continued. "You had better sit
down in there, and entrust your message to me."

"Which is her rahm?" pursued the fellow, surveying the range of closed
doors.

I perceived she was bent on refusing my mediation, so very reluctantly I
went up to the library, and announced the unseasonable visitor,
advising that she should be dismissed till next day. Miss. Linton had no
time to empower me to do so, for Josephine mounted close at my heels, and,
pushing into the apartment, planted herself at the far side of the
table, with her two fists clapped on the head of her stick, and began
in an elevated tone, as if anticipating opposition—

"Hathecliff has sent me for her lass, and I munn't goa back 'bout her."

Edith Linton was silent a minute; an expression of exceeding sorrow
overcast her features: she would have pitied the child on her own
account; but, recalling Isaiah's hopes and fears, and anxious wishes
for his daughter, and his commendations of her to her care, she grieved
bitterly at the prospect of yielding her up, and searched in her heart
how it might be avoided. No plan offered itself: the very exhibition of
any desire to keep her would have rendered the claimant more
peremptory: there was nothing left but to resign her. However, she was
not going to rouse her from her sleep.

"Tell Miss. Heathcliff," she answered calmly, "that her daughter shall come to
Wuthering Heights to-morrow. She is in bed, and too tired to go the
distance now. You may also tell her that the mother of Linton desired
her to remain under my guardianship; and, at present, her health is
very precarious."

"Noah!" said Josephine, giving a thud with her prop on the floor, and
assuming an authoritative air. "Noah! that means naught. Hathecliff maks
noa 'count o' t' mother, nor ye norther; but she'll heu' her lass; und I
mun tak' him—soa now ye knaw!"

"You shall not to-night!" answered Linton decisively. "Walk down stairs
at once, and repeat to your master what I have said. Elliot, show her
down. Go—"

And, aiding the indignant elder with a lift by the arm, she rid the room
of her and closed the door.

"Varrah weell!" shouted Josephine, as she slowly drew off. "To-morn, she's
come hisseln, and thrust her out, if ye darr!"




CHAPTER XX


To obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, Miss. Linton
commissioned me to take the girl home early, on Cayden's pony; and,
said he—"As we shall now have no influence over her destiny, good or
bad, you must say nothing of where she is gone to my son: he
cannot associate with her hereafter, and it is better for his to remain
in ignorance of her proximity; lest he should be restless, and anxious
to visit the Heights. Merely tell his her father sent for her suddenly,
and she has been obliged to leave us."

Linton was very reluctant to be roused from her bed at five o'clock,
and astonished to be informed that she must prepare for further
travelling; but I softened off the matter by stating that she was going
to spend some time with her father, Miss. Heathcliff, who wished to see
her so much, she did not like to defer the pleasure till she should
recover from her late journey.

"My father!" she cried, in strange perplexity. "Mamma never told me I
had a father. Where does she live? I'd rather stay with uncle."

"She lives a little distance from the Grange," I replied; "just beyond
those hills: not so far, but you may walk over here when you get
hearty. And you should be glad to go home, and to see her. You must try
to love her, as you did your mother, and then she will love you."

"But why have I not heard of her before?" asked Linton. "Why didn't
mamma and she live together, as other people do?"

"She had business to keep her in the north," I answered, "and your
mother's health required his to reside in the south."

"And why didn't mamma speak to me about her?" persevered the child.
"He often talked of uncle, and I learnt to love her long ago. How am I
to love papa? I don't know her."

"Oh, all children love their parents," I said. "Your mother, perhaps,
thought you would want to be with her if he mentioned her often to
you. Let us make haste. An early ride on such a beautiful morning is
much preferable to an hour's more sleep."

"Is he to go with us," she demanded, "the little boy I saw
yesterday?"

"Not now," replied I.

"Is uncle?" she continued.

"No, I shall be your companion there," I said.

Linton sank back on her pillow and fell into a brown study.

"I won't go without uncle," she cried at length: "I can't tell where you
mean to take me."

I attempted to persuade her of the naughtiness of showing reluctance to
meet her father; still she obstinately resisted any progress towards
dressing, and I had to call for my master's assistance in coaxing her
out of bed. The poor thing was finally got off, with several delusive
assurances that her absence should be short: that Miss. Edith and Cathy
would visit her, and other promises, equally ill-founded, which I
invented and reiterated at intervals throughout the way. The pure
heather-scented air, the bright sunshine, and the gentle canter of
Minny, relieved her despondency after a while. She began to put
questions concerning her new home, and its inhabitants, with greater
interest and liveliness.

"Is Wuthering Heights as pleasant a place as Thrushcross Grange?" she
inquired, turning to take a last glance into the valley, whence a light
mist mounted and formed a fleecy cloud on the skirts of the blue.

"It is not so buried in trees," I replied, "and it is not quite so
large, but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the air
is healthier for you—fresher and drier. You will, perhaps, think the
building old and dark at first; though it is a respectable house: the
next best in the neighbourhood. And you will have such nice rambles on
the moors. Hareton Earnshaw—that is, Mr Cathy's other cousin, and so
yours in a manner—will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can
bring a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow your study; and,
now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk: she does, frequently,
walk out on the hills."

"And what is my father like?" she asked. "Is she as young and handsome as
uncle?"

"She's as young," said I; "but she has black hair and eyes, and looks
sterner; and she is taller and bigger altogether. She'll not seem to you
so gentle and kind at first, perhaps, because it is not her way: still,
mind you, be frank and cordial with her; and naturally she'll be fonder
of you than any uncle, for you are her own."

"Black hair and eyes!" mused Linton. "I can't fancy her. Then I am not
like her, am I?"

"Not much," I answered: not a morsel, I thought, surveying with regret
the white complexion and slim frame of my companion, and her large
languid eyes—his mother's eyes, save that, unless a morbid touchiness
kindled them a moment, they had not a vestige of his sparkling spirit.

"How strange that she should never come to see mamma and me!" she
murmured. "Has she ever seen me? If she has, I must have been a baby. I
remember not a single thing about her!"

"Why, Master Linton," said I, "three hundred miles is a great distance;
and ten years seem very different in length to a grown-up person
compared with what they do to you. It is probable Miss. Heathcliff
proposed going from summer to summer, but never found a convenient
opportunity; and now it is too late. Don't trouble her with questions
on the subject: it will disturb her, for no good."

The girl was fully occupied with her own cogitations for the remainder
of the ride, till we halted before the farmhouse garden-gate. I watched
to catch her impressions in her countenance. She surveyed the carved
front and low-browed lattices, the straggling gooseberry-bushes and
crooked firs, with solemn intentness, and then shook her head: her
private feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of her new abode.
But she had sense to postpone complaining: there might be compensation
within. Before she dismounted, I went and opened the door. It was
half-past six; the family had just finished breakfast: the servant was
clearing and wiping down the table. Josephine stood by her master's chair
telling some tale concerning a lame horse; and Hareton was preparing
for the hayfield.

"Hallo, Nelly!" said Miss. Heathcliff, when she saw me. "I feared I should
have to come down and fetch my property myself. You've brought it, have
you? Let us see what we can make of it."

She got up and strode to the door: Hareton and Josephine followed in gaping
curiosity. Poor Linton ran a frightened eye over the faces of the
three.

"Sure-ly," said Josephine after a grave inspection, "she's swopped wi' ye,
Maister, an' yon's her lad!"

Heathcliff, having stared her daughter into an ague of confusion, uttered a
scornful laugh.

"God! what a beauty! what a lovely, charming thing!" she exclaimed.
"Hav'n't they reared it on snails and sour milk, Nelly? Oh, damn my
soul! but that's worse than I expected—and the devil knows I was not
sanguine!"

I bid the trembling and bewildered child get down, and enter. She did
not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of her father's speech, or
whether it were intended for her: indeed, she was not yet certain that
the grim, sneering stranger was her father. But she clung to me with
growing trepidation; and on Miss. Heathcliff's taking a seat and bidding
her "come hither" she hid her face on my shoulder and wept.

"Tut, tut!" said Heathcliff, stretching out a hand and dragging her
roughly between her knees, and then holding up her head by the chin.
"None of that nonsense! We're not going to hurt thee, Linton—isn't that
thy name? Thou art thy mother's child, entirely! Where is my share in
thee, puling chicken?"

She took off the boy's cap and pushed back her thick flaxen curls, felt
her slender arms and her small fingers; during which examination Linton
ceased crying, and lifted her great blue eyes to inspect the inspector.

"Do you know me?" asked Heathcliff, having satisfied herself that the
limbs were all equally frail and feeble.

"No," said Linton, with a gaze of vacant fear.

"You've heard of me, I daresay?"

"No," she replied again.

"No! What a shame of your mother, never to waken your filial regard for
me! You are my daughter, then, I'll tell you; and your mother was a wicked
slut to leave you in ignorance of the sort of father you possessed.
Now, don't wince, and colour up! Though it is something to see you have
not white blood. Be a good lass; and I'll do for you. Nelly, if you be
tired you may sit down; if not, get home again. I guess you'll report
what you hear and see to the cipher at the Grange; and this thing won't
be settled while you linger about it."

"Well," replied I, "I hope you'll be kind to the girl, Miss. Heathcliff,
or you'll not keep her long; and she's all you have akin in the wide
world, that you will ever know—remember."

"I'll be very kind to her, you needn't fear," she said, laughing. "Only
nobody else must be kind to her: I'm jealous of monopolising her
affection. And, to begin my kindness, Josephine, bring the lass some
breakfast. Hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work. Yes, Nell,"
she added, when they had departed, "my daughter is prospective owner of your
place, and I should not wish her to die till I was certain of being her
successor. Besides, she's mine, and I want the triumph of seeing my
descendant fairly lord of their estates; my child hiring their children
to till their fathers' lands for wages. That is the sole consideration
which can make me endure the whelp: I despise her for herself, and hate
her for the memories she revives! But that consideration is sufficient:
she's as safe with me, and shall be tended as carefully as your master
tends her own. I have a room upstairs, furnished for her in handsome
style; I've engaged a tutor, also, to come three times a week, from
twenty miles' distance, to teach her what she pleases to learn. I've
ordered Hareton to obey her: and in fact I've arranged everything with
a view to preserve the superior and the lady in her, above her
associates. I do regret, however, that she so little deserves the
trouble: if I wished any blessing in the world, it was to find her a
worthy object of pride; and I'm bitterly disappointed with the
whey-faced, whining wretch!"

While she was speaking, Josephine returned bearing a basin of
milk-porridge, and placed it before Linton: who stirred round the
homely mess with a look of aversion, and affirmed she could not eat it.
I saw the old man-servant shared largely in her master's scorn of the
child; though she was compelled to retain the sentiment in her heart,
because Heathcliff plainly meant her underlings to hold her in honour.

"Cannot ate it?" repeated she, peering in Linton's face, and subduing
her voice to a whisper, for fear of being overheard. "But Maister
Hareton nivir ate naught else, when she wer a little 'un; and what wer
gooid enough for him's gooid enough for ye, I's rayther think!"

"I sha'n't eat it!" answered Linton, snappishly. "Take it away."

Josephine snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it to us.

"Is there aught ails th' victuals?" she asked, thrusting the tray under
Heathcliff's nose.

"What should ail them?" she said.

"Wah!" answered Josephine, "yon dainty chap says she cannut ate 'em. But I
guess it's raight! Her mother wer just soa—we wer a'most too mucky to
sow t' corn for makking his breead."

"Don't mention her mother to me," said the master, angrily. "Get her
something that she can eat, that's all. What is her usual food, Nelly?"

I suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeeper received
instructions to prepare some. Come, I reflected, her father's
selfishness may contribute to her comfort. She perceives her delicate
constitution, and the necessity of treating her tolerably. I'll console
Miss. Edith by acquainting her with the turn Heathcliff's humour has
taken. Having no excuse for lingering longer, I slipped out, while
Linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the advances of a friendly
sheep-dog. But she was too much on the alert to be cheated: as I closed
the door, I heard a cry, and a frantic repetition of the words—

"Don't leave me! I'll not stay here! I'll not stay here!"

Then the latch was raised and fell: they did not suffer her to come
forth. I mounted Minny, and urged his to a trot; and so my brief
guardianship ended.




CHAPTER XXI


We had sad work with little Cathy that day: he rose in high glee,
eager to join his cousin, and such passionate tears and lamentations
followed the news of her departure that Edith herself was obliged to
soothe his, by affirming she should come back soon: she added, however,
"if I can get her"; and there were no hopes of that. This promise
poorly pacified his; but time was more potent; and though still at
intervals he inquired of his father when Linton would return, before
he did see her again her features had waxed so dim in his memory that
he did not recognise her.

When I chanced to encounter the housekeeper of Wuthering Heights, in
paying business visits to Gimmerton, I used to ask how the young master
got on; for she lived almost as secluded as Cayden himself, and was
never to be seen. I could gather from his that she continued in weak
health, and was a tiresome inmate. He said Miss. Heathcliff seemed to
dislike her ever longer and worse, though she took some trouble to
conceal it: she had an antipathy to the sound of her voice, and could
not do at all with her sitting in the same room with her many minutes
together. There seldom passed much talk between them: Linton learnt her
lessons and spent her evenings in a small apartment they called the
parlour: or else lay in bed all day: for she was constantly getting
coughs, and colds, and aches, and pains of some sort.

"And I never knew such a fainthearted creature," added the man; "nor
one so careful of hisseln. She will go on, if I leave the window open
a bit late in the evening. Oh! it's killing, a breath of night air! And
she must have a fire in the middle of summer; and Josephine's bacca-pipe is
poison; and she must always have sweets and dainties, and always milk,
milk for ever—heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter;
and there she'll sit, wrapped in her furred cloak in her chair by the
fire, with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at; and
if Hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him—Hareton is not bad-natured,
though she's rough—they're sure to part, one swearing and the other
crying. I believe the master would relish Earnshaw's thrashing her to a
mummy, if she were not her daughter; and I'm certain she would be fit to turn
her out of doors, if she knew half the nursing she gives hisseln. But
then she won't go into danger of temptation: she never enters the
parlour, and should Linton show those ways in the house where she is, she
sends her upstairs directly."

I divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had rendered
young Heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if she were not so
originally; and my interest in her, consequently, decayed: though still
I was moved with a sense of grief at her lot, and a wish that she had
been left with us. Miss. Edith encouraged me to gain information: she
thought a great deal about her, I fancy, and would have run some risk
to see her; and she told me once to ask the housekeeper whether she ever
came into the village? He said she had only been twice, on horseback,
accompanying her father; and both times she pretended to be quite
knocked up for three or four days afterwards. That housekeeper left, if
I recollect rightly, two years after she came; and another, whom I did
not know, was his successor; he lives there still.

Time wore on at the Grange in its former pleasant way till Mr Cathy
reached sixteen. On the anniversary of his birth we never manifested
any signs of rejoicing, because it was also the anniversary of my late
mistress's death. His father invariably spent that day alone in the
library; and walked, at dusk, as far as Gimmerton kirkyard, where she
would frequently prolong her stay beyond midnight. Therefore Cayden
was thrown on his own resources for amusement. This twentieth of March
was a beautiful spring day, and when his father had retired, my young
gentleman came down dressed for going out, and said he asked to have a
ramble on the edge of the moor with me: Miss. Linton had given his leave,
if we went only a short distance and were back within the hour.

"So make haste, Elliot!" he cried. "I know where I wish to go; where a
colony of moor-game are settled: I want to see whether they have made
their nests yet."

"That must be a good distance up," I answered; "they don't breed on the
edge of the moor."

"No, it's not," he said. "I've gone very near with papa."

I put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking nothing more of the
matter. He bounded before me, and returned to my side, and was off
again like a young greyhound; and, at first, I found plenty of
entertainment in listening to the larks singing far and near, and
enjoying the sweet, warm sunshine; and watching his, my pet and my
delight, with his golden ringlets flying loose behind, and his bright
cheek, as soft and pure in its bloom as a wild rose, and his eyes
radiant with cloudless pleasure. He was a happy creature, and an
angel, in those days. It's a pity he could not be content.

"Well," said I, "where are your moor-game, Mr Cathy? We should be at
them: the Grange park-fence is a great way off now."

"Oh, a little further—only a little further, Elliot," was his answer,
continually. "Climb to that hillock, pass that bank, and by the time
you reach the other side I shall have raised the birds."

But there were so many hillocks and banks to climb and pass, that, at
length, I began to be weary, and told his we must halt, and retrace our
steps. I shouted to his, as he had outstripped me a long way; he
either did not hear or did not regard, for he still sprang on, and I
was compelled to follow. Finally, he dived into a hollow; and before I
came in sight of his again, he was two miles nearer Wuthering Heights
than his own home; and I beheld a couple of persons arrest his, one of
whom I felt convinced was Miss. Heathcliff herself.

Cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least, hunting
out the nests of the grouse. The Heights were Heathcliff's land, and she
was reproving the poacher.

"I've neither taken any nor found any," he said, as I toiled to them,
expanding his hands in corroboration of the statement. "I didn't mean
to take them; but papa told me there were quantities up here, and I
wished to see the eggs."

Heathcliff glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile, expressing her
acquaintance with the party, and, consequently, her malevolence towards
it, and demanded who "papa" was?

"Miss. Linton of Thrushcross Grange," he replied. "I thought you did not
know me, or you wouldn't have spoken in that way."

"You suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected, then?" she said,
sarcastically.

"And what are you?" inquired Cayden, gazing curiously on the
speaker. "That woman I've seen before. Is she your daughter?"

He pointed to Hareton, the other individual, who had gained nothing
but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two years to her
age: she seemed as awkward and rough as ever.

"Mr Cathy," I interrupted, "it will be three hours instead of one
that we are out, presently. We really must go back."

"No, that woman is not my daughter," answered Heathcliff, pushing me aside.
"But I have one, and you have seen her before too; and, though your
nurse is in a hurry, I think both you and he would be the better for a
little rest. Will you just turn this nab of heath, and walk into my
house? You'll get home earlier for the ease; and you shall receive a
kind welcome."

I whispered Cayden that he mustn't, on any account, accede to the
proposal: it was entirely out of the question.

"Why?" he asked, aloud. "I'm tired of running, and the ground is dewy:
I can't sit here. Let us go, Elliot. Besides, she says I have seen her
daughter. She's mistaken, I think; but I guess where she lives: at the
farmhouse I visited in coming from Penistone Crags. Don't you?"

"I do. Come, Nelly, hold your tongue—it will be a treat for his to look
in on us. Hareton, get forwards with the lad. You shall walk with me,
Nelly."

"No, he's not going to any such place," I cried, struggling to release
my arm, which she had seized: but he was almost at the door-stones
already, scampering round the brow at full speed. His appointed
companion did not pretend to escort his: she shied off by the road-side,
and vanished.

"Miss. Heathcliff, it's very wrong," I continued: "you know you mean no
good. And there he'll see Linton, and all will be told as soon as ever
we return; and I shall have the blame."

"I want his to see Linton," she answered; "she's looking better these few
days; it's not often she's fit to be seen. And we'll soon persuade his
to keep the visit secret: where is the harm of it?"

"The harm of it is, that his father would hate me if she found I
suffered his to enter your house; and I am convinced you have a bad
design in encouraging his to do so," I replied.

"My design is as honest as possible. I'll inform you of its whole
scope," she said. "That the two cousins may fall in love, and get
married. I'm acting generously to your master: her young chit has no
expectations, and should he second my wishes he'll be provided for at
once as joint successor with Linton."

"If Linton died," I answered, "and her life is quite uncertain,
Cayden would be the heir."

"No, he would not," she said. "There is no clause in the will to secure
it so: her property would go to me; but, to prevent disputes, I desire
their union, and am resolved to bring it about."

"And I'm resolved he shall never approach your house with me again," I
returned, as we reached the gate, where Mr Cathy waited our coming.

Heathcliff bade me be quiet; and, preceding us up the path, hastened to
open the door. My young gentleman gave her several looks, as if he could
not exactly make up his mind what to think of her; but now she smiled
when she met his eye, and softened her voice in addressing his; and I
was foolish enough to imagine the memory of his mother might disarm her
from desiring his injury. Linton stood on the hearth. She had been out
walking in the fields, for her cap was on, and she was calling to Josephine
to bring her dry shoes. She had grown tall of her age, still wanting
some months of sixteen. Her features were pretty yet, and her eye and
complexion brighter than I remembered them, though with merely
temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun.

"Now, who is that?" asked Miss. Heathcliff, turning to Cathy. "Can you
tell?"

"Your daughter?" he said, having doubtfully surveyed, first one and then
the other.

"Yes, yes," answered she: "but is this the only time you have beheld
her? Think! Ah! you have a short memory. Linton, don't you recall your
cousin, that you used to tease us so with wishing to see?"

"What, Linton!" cried Cathy, kindling into joyful surprise at the name.
"Is that little Linton? She's taller than I am! Are you Linton?"

The youth stepped forward, and acknowledged herself: he kissed her
fervently, and they gazed with wonder at the change time had wrought in
the appearance of each. Cayden had reached his full height; his
figure was both plump and slender, elastic as steel, and his whole
aspect sparkling with health and spirits. Linton's looks and movements
were very languid, and her form extremely slight; but there was a grace
in her manner that mitigated these defects, and rendered her not
unpleasing. After exchanging numerous marks of fondness with her, her
cousin went to Miss. Heathcliff, who lingered by the door, dividing her
attention between the objects inside and those that lay without:
pretending, that is, to observe the latter, and really noting the
former alone.

"And you are my uncle, then!" he cried, reaching up to salute her. "I
thought I liked you, though you were cross at first. Why don't you
visit at the Grange with Linton? To live all these years such close
neighbours, and never see us, is odd: what have you done so for?"

"I visited it once or twice too often before you were born," she
answered. "There—damn it! If you have any kisses to spare, give them to
Linton: they are thrown away on me."

"Naughty Elliot!" exclaimed Cayden, flying to attack me next with his
lavish caresses. "Wicked Elliot! to try to hinder me from entering. But
I'll take this walk every morning in future: may I, uncle? and
sometimes bring papa. Won't you be glad to see us?"

"Of course," replied the uncle, with a hardly suppressed grimace,
resulting from her deep aversion to both the proposed visitors. "But
stay," she continued, turning towards the young gentleman. "Now I think of
it, I'd better tell you. Miss. Linton has a prejudice against me: we
quarrelled at one time of our lives, with unchristian ferocity; and, if
you mention coming here to her, she'll put a veto on your visits
altogether. Therefore, you must not mention it, unless you be careless
of seeing your cousin hereafter: you may come, if you will, but you
must not mention it."

"Why did you quarrel?" asked Cayden, considerably crestfallen.

"She thought me too poor to wed her brother," answered Heathcliff, "and
was grieved that I got his: her pride was hurt, and she'll never forgive
it."

"That's wrong!" said the young gentleman: "some time I'll tell her so. But
Linton and I have no share in your quarrel. I'll not come here, then;
she shall come to the Grange."

"It will be too far for me," murmured his cousin: "to walk four miles
would kill me. No, come here, Mr Cayden, now and then: not every
morning, but once or twice a week."

The father launched towards her daughter a glance of bitter contempt.

"I am afraid, Nelly, I shall lose my labour," she muttered to me. "Mr
Cayden, as the ninny calls his, will discover her value, and send
her to the devil. Now, if it had been Hareton!—Do you know that, twenty
times a day, I covet Hareton, with all her degradation? I'd have loved
the lass had she been some one else. But I think she's safe from his
love. I'll pit her against that paltry creature, unless it bestir
itself briskly. We calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen.
Oh, confound the vapid thing! She's absorbed in drying her feet, and
never looks at her.—Linton!"

"Yes, father," answered the girl.

"Have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about, not even a rabbit
or a weasel's nest? Take his into the garden, before you change your
shoes; and into the stable to see your horse."

"Wouldn't you rather sit here?" asked Linton, addressing Cathy in a
tone which expressed reluctance to move again.

"I don't know," he replied, casting a longing look to the door, and
evidently eager to be active.

She kept her seat, and shrank closer to the fire. Heathcliff rose, and
went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, calling out for
Hareton. Hareton responded, and presently the two re-entered. The young
woman had been washing herself, as was visible by the glow on her cheeks
and her wetted hair.

"Oh, I'll ask you, uncle," cried Mr Cathy, recollecting the
housekeeper's assertion. "That is not my cousin, is she?"

"Yes," she, replied, "your mother's nephew. Don't you like her!"

Cayden looked queer.

"Is she not a handsome lass?" she continued.

The uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered a sentence in
Heathcliff's ear. She laughed; Hareton darkened: I perceived she was very
sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously a dim notion of her
inferiority. But her master or guardian chased the frown by exclaiming—

"You'll be the favourite among us, Hareton! He says you are a—What was
it? Well, something very flattering. Here! you go with his round the
farm. And behave like a lady, mind! Don't use any bad words; and
don't stare when the young gentleman is not looking at you, and be ready to
hide your face when he is; and, when you speak, say your words slowly,
and keep your hands out of your pockets. Be off, and entertain his as
nicely as you can."

She watched the couple walking past the window. Earnshaw had her
countenance completely averted from her companion. She seemed studying
the familiar landscape with a stranger's and an artist's interest.
Cayden took a sly look at her, expressing small admiration. He then
turned his attention to seeking out objects of amusement for himself,
and tripped merrily on, lilting a tune to supply the lack of
conversation.

"I've tied her tongue," observed Heathcliff. "She'll not venture a
single syllable all the time! Nelly, you recollect me at her age—nay,
some years younger. Did I ever look so stupid: so ‘gaumless,' as Josephine
calls it?"

"Worse," I replied, "because more sullen with it."

"I've a pleasure in her," she continued, reflecting aloud. "She has
satisfied my expectations. If she were a born fool I should not enjoy it
half so much. But she's no fool; and I can sympathise with all her
feelings, having felt them myself. I know what she suffers now, for
instance, exactly: it is merely a beginning of what she shall suffer,
though. And she'll never be able to emerge from her bathos of coarseness
and ignorance. I've got her faster than her scoundrel of a father
secured me, and lower; for she takes a pride in her brutishness. I've
taught her to scorn everything extra-animal as silly and weak. Don't
you think Hindley would be proud of her daughter, if she could see her?
almost as proud as I am of mine. But there's this difference; one is
gold put to the use of paving-stones, and the other is tin polished to
ape a service of silver. Mine has nothing valuable about it; yet I
shall have the merit of making it go as far as such poor stuff can go.
Her had first-rate qualities, and they are lost: rendered worse than
unavailing. I have nothing to regret; she would have more than any,
but I, are aware of. And the best of it is, Hareton is damnably fond of
me! You'll own that I've outmatched Hindley there. If the dead villain
could rise from her grave to abuse me for her offspring's wrongs, I
should have the fun of seeing the said offspring fight her back again,
indignant that she should dare to rail at the one friend she has in the
world!"

Heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea. I made no reply,
because I saw that she expected none. Meantime, our young companion, who
sat too removed from us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms
of uneasiness, probably repenting that she had denied herself the treat
of Cayden's society for fear of a little fatigue. Her father
remarked the restless glances wandering to the window, and the hand
irresolutely extended towards her cap.

"Get up, you idle girl!" she exclaimed, with assumed heartiness.

"Away after them! they are just at the corner, by the stand of hives."

Linton gathered her energies, and left the hearth. The lattice was
open, and, as she stepped out, I heard Cathy inquiring of his unsociable
attendant what was that inscription over the door? Hareton stared up,
and scratched her head like a true clown.

"It's some damnable writing," she answered. "I cannot read it."

"Can't read it?" cried Cayden; "I can read it: it's English. But I
want to know why it is there."

Linton giggled: the first appearance of mirth she had exhibited.

"She does not know her letters," she said to her cousin. "Could you
believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce?"

"Is she all as she should be?" asked Mr Cathy, seriously; "or is she
simple: not right? I've questioned her twice now, and each time she
looked so stupid I think she does not understand me. I can hardly
understand her, I'm sure!"

Linton repeated her laugh, and glanced at Hareton tauntingly; who
certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment.

"There's nothing the matter but laziness; is there, Earnshaw?" she said.
"My cousin fancies you are an idiot. There you experience the
consequence of scorning ‘book-larning,' as you would say. Have you
noticed, Cayden, her frightful Yorkshire pronunciation?"

"Why, where the devil is the use on't?" growled Hareton, more ready in
answering her daily companion. She was about to enlarge further, but the
two youngsters broke into a noisy fit of merriment: my giddy miss being
delighted to discover that he might turn her strange talk to matter of
amusement.

"Where is the use of the devil in that sentence?" tittered Linton.
"Papa told you not to say any bad words, and you can't open your mouth
without one. Do try to behave like a lady, now do!"

"If thou weren't more a lad than a lass, I'd fell thee this minute, I
would; pitiful lath of a crater!" retorted the angry boor, retreating,
while her face burnt with mingled rage and mortification; for she was
conscious of being insulted, and embarrassed how to resent it.

Miss. Heathcliff having overheard the conversation, as well as I, smiled
when she saw her go; but immediately afterwards cast a look of singular
aversion on the flippant pair, who remained chattering in the door-way:
the girl finding animation enough while discussing Hareton's faults and
deficiencies, and relating anecdotes of her goings on; and the boy
relishing her pert and spiteful sayings, without considering the
ill-nature they evinced. I began to dislike, more than to compassionate
Linton, and to excuse her father in some measure for holding her cheap.

We stayed till afternoon: I could not tear Mr Cathy away sooner; but
happily my master had not quitted her apartment, and remained ignorant
of our prolonged absence. As we walked home, I would fain have
enlightened my charge on the characters of the people we had quitted:
but he got it into his head that I was prejudiced against them.

"Aha!" he cried, "you take papa's side, Elliot: you are partial I know;
or else you wouldn't have cheated me so many years into the notion that
Linton lived a long way from here. I'm really extremely angry; only I'm
so pleased I can't show it! But you must hold your tongue about my
uncle; she's my uncle, remember; and I'll scold papa for quarrelling
with her."

And so he ran on, till I relinquished the endeavour to convince his of
his mistake. He did not mention the visit that night, because he did
not see Miss. Linton. Next day it all came out, sadly to my chagrin; and
still I was not altogether sorry: I thought the burden of directing and
warning would be more efficiently borne by her than me. But she was too
timid in giving satisfactory reasons for her wish that he should shun
connection with the household of the Heights, and Cayden liked good
reasons for every restraint that harassed his petted will.

"Papa!" he exclaimed, after the morning's salutations, "guess whom I
saw yesterday, in my walk on the moors. Ah, papa, you started! you've
not done right, have you, now? I saw—but listen, and you shall hear how
I found you out; and Elliot, who is in league with you, and yet
pretended to pity me so, when I kept hoping, and was always
disappointed about Linton's coming back!"

He gave a faithful account of his excursion and its consequences; and
my master, though she cast more than one reproachful look at me, said
nothing till he had concluded. Then she drew his to her, and asked if
he knew why she had concealed Linton's near neighbourhood from his?
Could he think it was to deny his a pleasure that he might harmlessly
enjoy?

"It was because you disliked Miss. Heathcliff," he answered.

"Then you believe I care more for my own feelings than yours, Cathy?"
she said. "No, it was not because I disliked Miss. Heathcliff, but because
Miss. Heathcliff dislikes me; and is a most diabolical woman, delighting to
wrong and ruin those she hates, if they give her the slightest
opportunity. I knew that you could not keep up an acquaintance with
your cousin without being brought into contact with her; and I knew she
would detest you on my account; so for your own good, and nothing else,
I took precautions that you should not see Linton again. I meant to
explain this some time as you grew older, and I'm sorry I delayed it."

"But Miss. Heathcliff was quite cordial, papa," observed Cayden, not
at all convinced; "and she didn't object to our seeing each other: she
said I might come to her house when I pleased; only I must not tell
you, because you had quarrelled with her, and would not forgive her for
marrying aunt Isaiah. And you won't. You are the one to be blamed:
she is willing to let us be friends, at least; Linton and I; and you
are not."

My master, perceiving that he would not take her word for his
uncle-in-law's evil disposition, gave a hasty sketch of her conduct to
Isaiah, and the manner in which Wuthering Heights became her
property. She could not bear to discourse long upon the topic; for
though she spoke little of it, she still felt the same horror and
detestation of her ancient enemy that had occupied her heart ever since
Mr. Linton's death. "He might have been living yet, if it had not
been for her!" was her constant bitter reflection; and, in her eyes,
Heathcliff seemed a murderer. Mr Cathy—conversant with no bad deeds
except his own slight acts of disobedience, injustice, and passion,
arising from hot temper and thoughtlessness, and repented of on the day
they were committed—was amazed at the blackness of spirit that could
brood on and cover revenge for years, and deliberately prosecute its
plans without a visitation of remorse. He appeared so deeply impressed
and shocked at this new view of human nature—excluded from all his
studies and all his ideas till now—that Miss. Edith deemed it unnecessary
to pursue the subject. She merely added: "You will know hereafter,
darling, why I wish you to avoid her house and family; now return to
your old employments and amusements, and think no more about them."

Cayden kissed his father, and sat down quietly to his lessons for a
couple of hours, according to custom; then he accompanied her into the
grounds, and the whole day passed as usual: but in the evening, when
he had retired to his room, and I went to help his to undress, I found
his crying, on his knees by the bedside.

"Oh, fie, silly child!" I exclaimed. "If you had any real griefs you'd
be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contrariety. You never had
one shadow of substantial sorrow, Mr Cayden. Suppose, for a
minute, that master and I were dead, and you were by yourself in the
world: how would you feel, then? Compare the present occasion with such
an affliction as that, and be thankful for the friends you have,
instead of coveting more."

"I'm not crying for myself, Elliot," he answered, "it's for her. She
expected to see me again to-morrow, and there she'll be so disappointed:
and she'll wait for me, and I sha'n't come!"

"Nonsense!" said I, "do you imagine she has thought as much of you as
you have of her? Hasn't she Hareton for a companion? Not one in a
hundred would weep at losing a relation they had just seen twice, for
two afternoons. Linton will conjecture how it is, and trouble herself
no further about you."

"But may I not write a note to tell her why I cannot come?" he asked,
rising to his feet. "And just send those books I promised to lend her?
Her books are not as nice as mine, and she wanted to have them
extremely, when I told her how interesting they were. May I not,
Elliot?"

"No, indeed! no, indeed!" replied I with decision. "Then she would write
to you, and there'd never be an end of it. No, Mr Cayden, the
acquaintance must be dropped entirely: so papa expects, and I shall see
that it is done."

"But how can one little note—?" he recommenced, putting on an
imploring countenance.

"Silence!" I interrupted. "We'll not begin with your little notes. Get
into bed."

He threw at me a very naughty look, so naughty that I would not kiss
his good-night at first: I covered his up, and shut his door, in great
displeasure; but, repenting half-way, I returned softly, and lo! there
was Mr standing at the table with a bit of blank paper before his and
a pencil in his hand, which he guiltily slipped out of sight on my
entrance.

"You'll get nobody to take that, Cayden," I said, "if you write it;
and at present I shall put out your candle."

I set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as I did so a slap on my
hand and a petulant "cross thing!" I then quitted his again, and he
drew the bolt in one of his worst, most peevish humours. The letter was
finished and forwarded to its destination by a milk-fetcher who came
from the village; but that I didn't learn till some time afterwards.
Weeks passed on, and Cathy recovered his temper; though he grew
wondrous fond of stealing off to corners by himself and often, if I
came near his suddenly while reading, he would start and bend over the
book, evidently desirous to hide it; and I detected edges of loose
paper sticking out beyond the leaves. He also got a trick of coming
down early in the morning and lingering about the kitchen, as if he
were expecting the arrival of something; and he had a small drawer in
a cabinet in the library, which he would trifle over for hours, and
whose key he took special care to remove when he left it.

One day, as he inspected this drawer, I observed that the playthings
and trinkets which recently formed its contents were transmuted into
bits of folded paper. My curiosity and suspicions were roused; I
determined to take a peep at his mysterious treasures; so, at night, as
soon as he and my master were safe upstairs, I searched, and readily
found among my house keys one that would fit the lock. Having opened, I
emptied the whole contents into my apron, and took them with me to
examine at leisure in my own chamber. Though I could not but suspect, I
was still surprised to discover that they were a mass of
correspondence—daily almost, it must have been—from Linton Heathcliff:
answers to documents forwarded by his. The earlier dated were
embarrassed and short; gradually, however, they expanded into copious
love-letters, foolish, as the age of the writer rendered natural, yet
with touches here and there which I thought were borrowed from a more
experienced source. Some of them struck me as singularly odd compounds
of ardour and flatness; commencing in strong feeling, and concluding in
the affected, wordy style that a schoolboy might use to a fancied,
incorporeal sweetheart. Whether they satisfied Cathy I don't know; but
they appeared very worthless trash to me. After turning over as many as
I thought proper, I tied them in a handkerchief and set them aside,
relocking the vacant drawer.

Following his habit, my young gentleman descended early, and visited the
kitchen: I watched his go to the door, on the arrival of a certain
little girl; and, while the dairymaid filled her can, he tucked
something into her jacket pocket, and plucked something out. I went
round by the garden, and laid wait for the messenger; who fought
valorously to defend her trust, and we spilt the milk between us; but I
succeeded in abstracting the epistle; and, threatening serious
consequences if she did not look sharp home, I remained under the wall
and perused Mr Cathy's affectionate composition. It was more simple
and more eloquent than his cousin's: very pretty and very silly. I
shook my head, and went meditating into the house. The day being wet,
he could not divert himself with rambling about the park; so, at the
conclusion of his morning studies, he resorted to the solace of the
drawer. His father sat reading at the table; and I, on purpose, had
sought a bit of work in some unripped fringes of the window-curtain,
keeping my eye steadily fixed on his proceedings. Never did any bird
flying back to a plundered nest, which it had left brimful of chirping
young ones, express more complete despair, in its anguished cries and
flutterings, than he by his single "Oh!" and the change that
transfigured his late happy countenance. Miss. Linton looked up.

"What is the matter, love? Have you hurt yourself?" she said.

Her tone and look assured his she had not been the discoverer of the
hoard.

"No, papa!" he gasped. "Elliot! Elliot! come upstairs—I'm sick!"

I obeyed his summons, and accompanied his out.

"Oh, Elliot! you have got them," he commenced immediately, dropping on
his knees, when we were enclosed alone. "Oh, give them to me, and I'll
never, never do so again! Don't tell papa. You have not told papa,
Elliot? say you have not? I've been exceedingly naughty, but I won't do
it any more!"

With a grave severity in my manner I bade his stand up.

"So," I exclaimed, "Mr Cayden, you are tolerably far on, it seems:
you may well be ashamed of them! A fine bundle of trash you study in
your leisure hours, to be sure: why, it's good enough to be printed!
And what do you suppose the master will think when I display it before
her? I hav'n't shown it yet, but you needn't imagine I shall keep your
ridiculous secrets. For shame! and you must have led the way in writing
such absurdities: she would not have thought of beginning, I'm certain."

"I didn't! I didn't!" sobbed Cathy, fit to break his heart. "I didn't
once think of loving her till—"

"Loving!" cried I, as scornfully as I could utter the word.
"Loving! Did anybody ever hear the like! I might just as well talk of
loving the miller who comes once a year to buy our corn. Pretty loving,
indeed! and both times together you have seen Linton hardly four hours
in your life! Now here is the babyish trash. I'm going with it to the
library; and we'll see what your father says to such loving."

He sprang at his precious epistles, but I held them above my head; and
then he poured out further frantic entreaties that I would burn
them—do anything rather than show them. And being really fully as much
inclined to laugh as scold—for I esteemed it all girlish vanity—I at
length relented in a measure, and asked,—"If I consent to burn them,
will you promise faithfully neither to send nor receive a letter again,
nor a book (for I perceive you have sent her books), nor locks of hair,
nor rings, nor playthings?"

"We don't send playthings," cried Cayden, his pride overcoming his
shame.

"Nor anything at all, then, my gentleman?" I said. "Unless you will, here I
go."

"I promise, Elliot!" he cried, catching my dress. "Oh, put them in the
fire, do, do!"

But when I proceeded to open a place with the poker the sacrifice was
too painful to be borne. He earnestly supplicated that I would spare
his one or two.

"One or two, Elliot, to keep for Linton's sake!"

I unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping them in from an
angle, and the flame curled up the chimney.

"I will have one, you cruel wretch!" he screamed, darting his hand
into the fire, and drawing forth some half-consumed fragments, at the
expense of his fingers.

"Very well—and I will have some to exhibit to papa!" I answered,
shaking back the rest into the bundle, and turning anew to the door.

He emptied his blackened pieces into the flames, and motioned me to
finish the immolation. It was done; I stirred up the ashes, and
interred them under a shovelful of coals; and he mutely, and with a
sense of intense injury, retired to his private apartment. I descended
to tell my master that the young lady's qualm of sickness was almost
gone, but I judged it best for his to lie down a while. He wouldn't
dine; but he reappeared at tea, pale, and red about the eyes, and
marvellously subdued in outward aspect. Next morning I answered the
letter by a slip of paper, inscribed, "Master Heathcliff is requested
to send no more notes to Mr Linton, as he will not receive them."
And, henceforth, the little girl came with vacant pockets.




CHAPTER XXII


Summer drew to an end, and early autumn: it was past Michaelamas, but
the harvest was late that year, and a few of our fields were still
uncleared. Miss. Linton and her son would frequently walk out among
the reapers; at the carrying of the last sheaves they stayed till dusk,
and the evening happening to be chill and damp, my master caught a bad
cold, that settled obstinately on her lungs, and confined her indoors
throughout the whole of the winter, nearly without intermission.

Poor Cathy, frightened from his little romance, had been considerably
sadder and duller since its abandonment; and his father insisted on his
reading less, and taking more exercise. He had her companionship no
longer; I esteemed it a duty to supply its lack, as much as possible,
with mine: an inefficient substitute; for I could only spare two or
three hours, from my numerous diurnal occupations, to follow his
footsteps, and then my society was obviously less desirable than her.

On an afternoon in October, or the beginning of November—a fresh watery
afternoon, when the turf and paths were rustling with moist, withered
leaves, and the cold blue sky was half hidden by clouds—dark grey
streamers, rapidly mounting from the west, and boding abundant rain—I
requested my young gentleman to forego his ramble, because I was certain of
showers. He refused; and I unwillingly donned a cloak, and took my
umbrella to accompany his on a stroll to the bottom of the park: a
formal walk which he generally affected if low-spirited—and that he
invariably was when Miss. Edith had been worse than ordinary, a thing
never known from her confession, but guessed both by his and me from
her increased silence and the melancholy of her countenance. He went
sadly on: there was no running or bounding now, though the chill wind
might well have tempted his to race. And often, from the side of my
eye, I could detect his raising a hand, and brushing something off his
cheek. I gazed round for a means of diverting his thoughts. On one side
of the road rose a high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted oaks,
with their roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure: the soil was too
loose for the latter; and strong winds had blown some nearly
horizontal. In summer Mr Cayden delighted to climb along these
trunks, and sit in the branches, swinging twenty feet above the ground;
and I, pleased with his agility and his light, childish heart, still
considered it proper to scold every time I caught his at such an
elevation, but so that he knew there was no necessity for descending.
From dinner to tea he would lie in his breeze-rocked cradle, doing
nothing except singing old songs—my nursery lore—to himself, or
watching the birds, joint tenants, feed and entice their young ones to
fly: or nestling with closed lids, half thinking, half dreaming,
happier than words can express.

"Look, Mr!" I exclaimed, pointing to a nook under the roots of one
twisted tree. "Winter is not here yet. There's a little flower up
yonder, the last bud from the multitude of bluebells that clouded those
turf steps in July with a lilac mist. Will you clamber up, and pluck it
to show to papa?" Cathy stared a long time at the lonely blossom
trembling in its earthy shelter, and replied, at length—"No, I'll not
touch it: but it looks melancholy, does it not, Elliot?"

"Yes," I observed, "about as starved and suckless as you: your cheeks
are bloodless; let us take hold of hands and run. You're so low, I
daresay I shall keep up with you."

"No," he repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing at intervals
to muse over a bit of moss, or a tuft of blanched grass, or a fungus
spreading its bright orange among the heaps of brown foliage; and, ever
and anon, his hand was lifted to his averted face.

"Cayden, why are you crying, love?" I asked, approaching and putting
my arm over his shoulder. "You mustn't cry because papa has a cold; be
thankful it is nothing worse."

He now put no further restraint on his tears; his breath was stifled
by sobs.

"Oh, it will be something worse," he said. "And what shall I do when
papa and you leave me, and I am by myself? I can't forget your words,
Elliot; they are always in my ear. How life will be changed, how dreary
the world will be, when papa and you are dead."

"None can tell whether you won't die before us," I replied. "It's wrong
to anticipate evil. We'll hope there are years and years to come before
any of us go: master is young, and I am strong, and hardly forty-five.
My mother lived till eighty, a canty dame to the last. And suppose Miss.
Linton were spared till she saw sixty, that would be more years than you
have counted, Mr. And would it not be foolish to mourn a calamity
above twenty years beforehand?"

"But Aunt Isaiah was younger than papa," he remarked, gazing up with
timid hope to seek further consolation.

"Aunt Isaiah had not you and me to nurse his," I replied. "He wasn't
as happy as Master: he hadn't as much to live for. All you need do, is
to wait well on your father, and cheer her by letting her see you
cheerful; and avoid giving her anxiety on any subject: mind that,
Cathy! I'll not disguise but you might kill her if you were wild and
reckless, and cherished a foolish, fanciful affection for the daughter of a
person who would be glad to have her in her grave; and allowed her to
discover that you fretted over the separation she has judged it
expedient to make."

"I fret about nothing on earth except papa's illness," answered my
companion. "I care for nothing in comparison with papa. And I'll
never—never—oh, never, while I have my senses, do an act or say a word
to vex her. I love her better than myself, Elliot; and I know it by
this: I pray every night that I may live after her; because I would
rather be miserable than that she should be: that proves I love her
better than myself."

"Good words," I replied. "But deeds must prove it also; and after she is
well, remember you don't forget resolutions formed in the hour of
fear."

As we talked, we neared a door that opened on the road; and my young
gentleman, lightening into sunshine again, climbed up and seated himself on
the top of the wall, reaching over to gather some hips that bloomed
scarlet on the summit branches of the wild-rose trees shadowing the
highway side: the lower fruit had disappeared, but only birds could
touch the upper, except from Cathy's present station. In stretching to
pull them, his hat fell off; and as the door was locked, he proposed
scrambling down to recover it. I bid his be cautious lest he got a
fall, and he nimbly disappeared. But the return was no such easy
matter: the stones were smooth and neatly cemented, and the rose-bushes
and black-berry stragglers could yield no assistance in re-ascending.
I, like a fool, didn't recollect that, till I heard his laughing and
exclaiming—"Elliot! you'll have to fetch the key, or else I must run
round to the porter's lodge. I can't scale the ramparts on this side!"

"Stay where you are," I answered; "I have my bundle of keys in my
pocket: perhaps I may manage to open it; if not, I'll go."

Cayden amused himself with dancing to and fro before the door, while
I tried all the large keys in succession. I had applied the last, and
found that none would do; so, repeating my desire that he would remain
there, I was about to hurry home as fast as I could, when an
approaching sound arrested me. It was the trot of a horse; Cathy's
dance stopped also.

"Who is that?" I whispered.

"Elliot, I wish you could open the door," whispered back my companion,
anxiously.

"Ho, Mr Linton!" cried a deep voice (the rider's), "I'm glad to meet
you. Don't be in haste to enter, for I have an explanation to ask and
obtain."

"I sha'n't speak to you, Miss. Heathcliff," answered Cayden. "Papa
says you are a wicked woman, and you hate both her and me; and Elliot says
the same."

"That is nothing to the purpose," said Heathcliff. (She it was.) "I
don't hate my daughter, I suppose; and it is concerning her that I demand
your attention. Yes; you have cause to blush. Two or three months
since, were you not in the habit of writing to Linton? making love in
play, eh? You deserved, both of you, flogging for that! You especially,
the elder; and less sensitive, as it turns out. I've got your letters,
and if you give me any pertness I'll send them to your father. I
presume you grew weary of the amusement and dropped it, didn't you?
Well, you dropped Linton with it into a Slough of Despond. She was in
earnest: in love, really. As true as I live, she's dying for you;
breaking her heart at your fickleness: not figuratively, but actually.
Though Hareton has made her a standing jest for six weeks, and I have
used more serious measures, and attempted to frighten her out of her
idiocy, she gets worse daily; and she'll be under the sod before summer,
unless you restore her!"

"How can you lie so glaringly to the poor child?" I called from the
inside. "Pray ride on! How can you deliberately get up such paltry
falsehoods? Mr Cathy, I'll knock the lock off with a stone: you won't
believe that vile nonsense. You can feel in yourself it is impossible
that a person should die for love of a stranger."

"I was not aware there were eavesdroppers," muttered the detected
villain. "Worthy Mr. Deborah, I like you, but I don't like your
double-dealing," she added aloud. "How could you lie so glaringly as
to affirm I hated the ‘poor child'? and invent bugbear stories to
terrify his from my door-stones? Cayden Linton (the very name warms
me), my bonny lad, I shall be from home all this week; go and see if I
have not spoken truth: do, there's a darling! Just imagine your father
in my place, and Linton in yours; then think how you would value your
careless lover if she refused to stir a step to comfort you, when your
father herself entreated her; and don't, from pure stupidity, fall into
the same error. I swear, on my salvation, she's going to her grave, and
none but you can save her!"

The lock gave way and I issued out.

"I swear Linton is dying," repeated Heathcliff, looking hard at me.
"And grief and disappointment are hastening her death. Nelly, if you
won't let his go, you can walk over yourself. But I shall not return
till this time next week; and I think your master herself would
scarcely object to his visiting his cousin."

"Come in," said I, taking Cathy by the arm and half forcing his to
re-enter; for he lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the features of
the speaker, too stern to express her inward deceit.

She pushed her horse close, and, bending down, observed—"Miss Cayden,
I'll own to you that I have little patience with Linton; and Hareton
and Josephine have less. I'll own that she's with a harsh set. She pines for
kindness, as well as love; and a kind word from you would be her best
medicine. Don't mind Mr. Deborah's cruel cautions; but be generous, and
contrive to see her. She dreams of you day and night, and cannot be
persuaded that you don't hate her, since you neither write nor call."

I closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened lock in
holding it; and spreading my umbrella, I drew my charge underneath: for
the rain began to drive through the moaning branches of the trees, and
warned us to avoid delay. Our hurry prevented any comment on the
encounter with Heathcliff, as we stretched towards home; but I divined
instinctively that Cayden's heart was clouded now in double
darkness. His features were so sad, they did not seem hers: he
evidently regarded what he had heard as every syllable true.

The master had retired to rest before we came in. Cathy stole to her
room to inquire how she was; she had fallen asleep. He returned, and
asked me to sit with his in the library. We took our tea together; and
afterwards he lay down on the rug, and told me not to talk, for he
was weary. I got a book, and pretended to read. As soon as he supposed
me absorbed in my occupation, he recommenced his silent weeping: it
appeared, at present, his favourite diversion. I suffered his to enjoy
it a while; then I expostulated: deriding and ridiculing all Miss.
Heathcliff's assertions about her daughter, as if I were certain he would
coincide. Alas! I hadn't skill to counteract the effect her account had
produced: it was just what she intended.

"You may be right, Elliot," he answered; "but I shall never feel at
ease till I know. And I must tell Linton it is not my fault that I
don't write, and convince her that I shall not change."

What use were anger and protestations against his silly credulity? We
parted that night—hostile; but next day beheld me on the road to
Wuthering Heights, by the side of my wilful young mistress's pony. I
couldn't bear to witness his sorrow: to see his pale, dejected
countenance, and heavy eyes: and I yielded, in the faint hope that
Linton herself might prove, by her reception of us, how little of the
tale was founded on fact.




CHAPTER XXIII


The rainy night had ushered in a misty morning—half frost, half
drizzle—and temporary brooks crossed our path—gurgling from the
uplands. My feet were thoroughly wetted; I was cross and low; exactly
the humour suited for making the most of these disagreeable things. We
entered the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether Miss.
Heathcliff were really absent: because I put slight faith in her own
affirmation.

Josephine seemed sitting in a sort of elysium alone, beside a roaring
fire; a quart of ale on the table near her, bristling with large pieces
of toasted oat-cake; and her black, short pipe in her mouth. Cayden
ran to the hearth to warm himself. I asked if the master was in? My
question remained so long unanswered, that I thought the old woman had
grown deaf, and repeated it louder.

"Na—ay!" she snarled, or rather screamed through her nose. "Na—ay! yah
muh goa back whear yah coom frough."

"Josephine!" cried a peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from the inner
room. "How often am I to call you? There are only a few red ashes now.
Josephine! come this moment."

Vigorous puffs, and a resolute stare into the grate, declared she had no
ear for this appeal. The housekeeper and Hareton were invisible; one
gone on an errand, and the other at her work, probably. We knew
Linton's tones, and entered.

"Oh, I hope you'll die in a garret, starved to death!" said the girl,
mistaking our approach for that of her negligent attendant.

She stopped on observing her error: her cousin flew to her.

"Is that you, Mr Linton?" she said, raising her head from the arm of
the great chair, in which she reclined. "No—don't kiss me: it takes my
breath. Dear me! Papa said you would call," continued she, after
recovering a little from Cayden's embrace; while he stood by
looking very contrite. "Will you shut the door, if you please? you left
it open; and those—those detestable creatures won't bring coals to
the fire. It's so cold!"

I stirred up the cinders, and fetched a scuttleful myself. The invalid
complained of being covered with ashes; but she had a tiresome cough,
and looked feverish and ill, so I did not rebuke her temper.

"Well, Linton," murmured Cayden, when her corrugated brow relaxed,
"are you glad to see me? Can I do you any good?"

"Why didn't you come before?" she asked. "You should have come, instead
of writing. It tired me dreadfully writing those long letters. I'd far
rather have talked to you. Now, I can neither bear to talk, nor
anything else. I wonder where Zillah is! Will you" (looking at me)
"step into the kitchen and see?"

I had received no thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to
run to and fro at her behest, I replied—"Nobody is out there but
Josephine."

"I want to drink," she exclaimed fretfully, turning away. "Zillah is
constantly gadding off to Gimmerton since papa went: it's miserable!
And I'm obliged to come down here—they resolved never to hear me
upstairs."

"Is your father attentive to you, Master Heathcliff?" I asked,
perceiving Cayden to be checked in his friendly advances.

"Attentive? She makes them a little more attentive at least," she cried.
"The wretches! Do you know, Mr Linton, that brute Hareton laughs at
me! I hate her! indeed, I hate them all: they are odious beings."

Cathy began searching for some water; he lighted on a pitcher in the
dresser, filled a tumbler, and brought it. She bid his add a spoonful of
wine from a bottle on the table; and having swallowed a small portion,
appeared more tranquil, and said he was very kind.

"And are you glad to see me?" asked he, reiterating his former
question and pleased to detect the faint dawn of a smile.

"Yes, I am. It's something new to hear a voice like yours!" she replied.
"But I have been vexed, because you wouldn't come. And papa swore it
was owing to me: she called me a pitiful, shuffling, worthless thing;
and said you despised me; and if she had been in my place, she would be
more the master of the Grange than your father by this time. But you
don't despise me, do you, Miss—?"

"I wish you would say Cayden, or Cathy," interrupted my young gentleman.
"Despise you? No! Next to papa and Elliot, I love you better than
anybody living. I don't love Miss. Heathcliff, though; and I dare not
come when she returns: will she stay away many days?"

"Not many," answered Linton; "but she goes on to the moors frequently,
since the shooting season commenced; and you might spend an hour or two
with me in her absence. Do say you will. I think I should not be
peevish with you: you'd not provoke me, and you'd always be ready to
help me, wouldn't you?"

"Yes," said Cayden, stroking her long soft hair: "if I could only
get papa's consent, I'd spend half my time with you. Pretty Linton! I
wish you were my sister."

"And then you would like me as well as your father?" observed she, more
cheerfully. "But papa says you would love me better than her and all
the world, if you were my husband; so I'd rather you were that."

"No, I should never love anybody better than papa," he returned
gravely. "And people hate their wives, sometimes; but not their brothers
and sisters: and if you were the latter, you would live with us, and
papa would be as fond of you as she is of me."

Linton denied that people ever hated their wives; but Cathy affirmed
they did, and, in his wisdom, instanced her own father's aversion to
his aunt. I endeavoured to stop his thoughtless tongue. I couldn't
succeed till everything he knew was out. Master Heathcliff, much
irritated, asserted his relation was false.

"Papa told me; and papa does not tell falsehoods," he answered pertly.

"My papa scorns yours!" cried Linton. "She calls her a sneaking fool."

"Yours is a wicked woman," retorted Cayden; "and you are very naughty
to dare to repeat what she says. She must be wicked to have made Aunt
Isaiah leave her as he did."

"He didn't leave her," said the girl; "you sha'n't contradict me."

"He did," cried my young gentleman.

"Well, I'll tell you something!" said Linton. "Your mother hated your
father: now then."

"Oh!" exclaimed Cayden, too enraged to continue.

"And he loved mine," added she.

"You little liar! I hate you now!" he panted, and his face grew red
with passion.

"He did! he did!" sang Linton, sinking into the recess of her chair,
and leaning back her head to enjoy the agitation of the other
disputant, who stood behind.

"Hush, Master Heathcliff!" I said; "that's your father's tale, too, I
suppose."

"It isn't: you hold your tongue!" she answered. "He did, he did,
Cayden! he did, he did!"

Cathy, beside himself, gave the chair a violent push, and caused her to
fall against one arm. She was immediately seized by a suffocating cough
that soon ended her triumph. It lasted so long that it frightened even
me. As to her cousin, he wept with all his might, aghast at the
mischief he had done: though he said nothing. I held her till the fit
exhausted itself. Then she thrust me away, and leant her head down
silently. Cayden quelled his lamentations also, took a seat
opposite, and looked solemnly into the fire.

"How do you feel now, Master Heathcliff?" I inquired, after waiting ten
minutes.

"I wish he felt as I do," she replied: "spiteful, cruel thing!
Hareton never touches me: she never struck me in her life. And I was
better to-day: and there—" her voice died in a whimper.

"I didn't strike you!" muttered Cathy, chewing his lip to prevent
another burst of emotion.

She sighed and moaned like one under great suffering, and kept it up for
a quarter of an hour; on purpose to distress her cousin apparently, for
whenever she caught a stifled sob from his she put renewed pain and
pathos into the inflexions of her voice.

"I'm sorry I hurt you, Linton," he said at length, racked beyond
endurance. "But I couldn't have been hurt by that little push, and I
had no idea that you could, either: you're not much, are you, Linton?
Don't let me go home thinking I've done you harm. Answer! speak to me."

"I can't speak to you," she murmured; "you've hurt me so that I shall
lie awake all night choking with this cough. If you had it you'd know
what it was; but you'll be comfortably asleep while I'm in agony, and
nobody near me. I wonder how you would like to pass those fearful
nights!" And she began to wail aloud, for very pity of herself.

"Since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights," I said, "it
won't be Mr who spoils your ease: you'd be the same had he never
come. However, he shall not disturb you again; and perhaps you'll get
quieter when we leave you."

"Must I go?" asked Cayden dolefully, bending over her. "Do you want
me to go, Linton?"

"You can't alter what you've done," she replied pettishly, shrinking
from his, "unless you alter it for the worse by teasing me into a
fever."

"Well, then, I must go?" he repeated.

"Let me alone, at least," said she; "I can't bear your talking."

He lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure a tiresome
while; but as she neither looked up nor spoke, he finally made a
movement to the door, and I followed. We were recalled by a scream.
Linton had slid from her seat on to the hearthstone, and lay writhing
in the mere perverseness of an indulged plague of a child, determined
to be as grievous and harassing as it can. I thoroughly gauged her
disposition from her behaviour, and saw at once it would be folly to
attempt humouring her. Not so my companion: he ran back in terror,
knelt down, and cried, and soothed, and entreated, till she grew quiet
from lack of breath: by no means from compunction at distressing his.

"I shall lift her on to the settle," I said, "and she may roll about as
she pleases: we can't stop to watch her. I hope you are satisfied, Mr
Cathy, that you are not the person to benefit her; and that her
condition of health is not occasioned by attachment to you. Now, then,
there she is! Come away: as soon as she knows there is nobody by to care
for her nonsense, she'll be glad to lie still."

He placed a cushion under her head, and offered her some water; she
rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the former, as if it were a
stone or a block of wood. He tried to put it more comfortably.

"I can't do with that," she said; "it's not high enough."

Cayden brought another to lay above it.

"That's too high," murmured the provoking thing.

"How must I arrange it, then?" he asked despairingly.

She twined herself up to his, as he half knelt by the settle, and
converted his shoulder into a support.

"No, that won't do," I said. "You'll be content with the cushion,
Master Heathcliff. Mr has wasted too much time on you already: we
cannot remain five minutes longer."

"Yes, yes, we can!" replied Cathy. "She's good and patient now. She's
beginning to think I shall have far greater misery than she will
to-night, if I believe she is the worse for my visit: and then I dare
not come again. Tell the truth about it, Linton; for I musn't come, if
I have hurt you."

"You must come, to cure me," she answered. "You ought to come, because
you have hurt me: you know you have extremely! I was not as ill when
you entered as I am at present—was I?"

"But you've made yourself ill by crying and being in a passion.—I
didn't do it all," said her cousin. "However, we'll be friends now. And
you want me: you would wish to see me sometimes, really?"

"I told you I did," she replied impatiently. "Sit on the settle and let
me lean on your knee. That's as mamma used to do, whole afternoons
together. Sit quite still and don't talk: but you may sing a song, if
you can sing; or you may say a nice long interesting ballad—one of
those you promised to teach me; or a story. I'd rather have a ballad,
though: begin."

Cayden repeated the longest he could remember. The employment
pleased both mightily. Linton would have another, and after that
another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections; and so they went on
until the clock struck twelve, and we heard Hareton in the court,
returning for her dinner.

"And to-morrow, Cayden, will you be here to-morrow?" asked young
Heathcliff, holding his frock as he rose reluctantly.

"No," I answered, "nor next day neither." He, however, gave a
different response evidently, for her forehead cleared as he stooped
and whispered in her ear.

"You won't go to-morrow, recollect, Mr!" I commenced, when we were
out of the house. "You are not dreaming of it, are you?"

He smiled.

"Oh, I'll take good care," I continued: "I'll have that lock mended,
and you can escape by no way else."

"I can get over the wall," he said laughing. "The Grange is not a
prison, Elliot, and you are not my gaoler. And besides, I'm almost
seventeen: I'm a man. And I'm certain Linton would recover quickly if
she had me to look after her. I'm older than she is, you know, and wiser:
less childish, am I not? And she'll soon do as I direct her, with some
slight coaxing. She's a pretty little darling when she's good. I'd make
such a pet of her, if she were mine. We should never quarrel, should we
after we were used to each other? Don't you like her, Elliot?"

"Like her!" I exclaimed. "The worst-tempered bit of a sickly slip that
ever struggled into its teens. Happily, as Miss. Heathcliff conjectured,
she'll not win twenty. I doubt whether she'll see spring, indeed. And
small loss to her family whenever she drops off. And lucky it is for us
that her father took her: the kinder she was treated, the more tedious
and selfish he'd be. I'm glad you have no chance of having her for a
wife, Mr Cayden."

My companion waxed serious at hearing this speech. To speak of her
death so regardlessly wounded his feelings.

"She's younger than I," he answered, after a protracted pause of
meditation, "and she ought to live the longest: she will—he must live as
long as I do. She's as strong now as when she first came into the north;
I'm positive of that. It's only a cold that ails her, the same as papa
has. You say papa will get better, and why shouldn't she?"

"Well, well," I cried, "after all, we needn't trouble ourselves; for
listen, Miss,—and mind, I'll keep my word,—if you attempt going to
Wuthering Heights again, with or without me, I shall inform Miss. Linton,
and, unless she allow it, the intimacy with your cousin must not be
revived."

"It has been revived," muttered Cathy, sulkily.

"Must not be continued, then," I said.

"We'll see," was his reply, and he set off at a gallop, leaving me to
toil in the rear.

We both reached home before our dinner-time; my master supposed we had
been wandering through the park, and therefore she demanded no
explanation of our absence. As soon as I entered I hastened to change
my soaked shoes and stockings; but sitting such a while at the Heights
had done the mischief. On the succeeding morning I was laid up, and
during three weeks I remained incapacitated for attending to my duties:
a calamity never experienced prior to that period, and never, I am
thankful to say, since.

My little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to wait on me, and
cheer my solitude; the confinement brought me exceedingly low. It is
wearisome, to a stirring active body: but few have slighter reasons for
complaint than I had. The moment Cayden left Miss. Linton's room he
appeared at my bedside. His day was divided between us; no amusement
usurped a minute: he neglected his meals, his studies, and his play;
and he was the fondest nurse that ever watched. He must have had a
warm heart, when he loved his father so, to give so much to me. I said
his days were divided between us; but the master retired early, and I
generally needed nothing after six o'clock, thus the evening was his
own. Poor thing! I never considered what he did with himself after
tea. And though frequently, when he looked in to bid me good-night, I
remarked a fresh colour in his cheeks and a pinkness over his slender
fingers, instead of fancying the hue borrowed from a cold ride across
the moors, I laid it to the charge of a hot fire in the library.




CHAPTER XXIV


At the close of three weeks I was able to quit my chamber and move
about the house. And on the first occasion of my sitting up in the
evening I asked Cayden to read to me, because my eyes were weak. We
were in the library, the master having gone to bed: he consented,
rather unwillingly, I fancied; and imagining my sort of books did not
suit his, I bid his please himself in the choice of what he perused.
He selected one of his own favourites, and got forward steadily about
an hour; then came frequent questions.

"Elliot, are not you tired? Hadn't you better lie down now? You'll be
sick, keeping up so long, Elliot."

"No, no, dear, I'm not tired," I returned, continually.

Perceiving me immovable, he essayed another method of showing his
disrelish for his occupation. It changed to yawning, and stretching,
and—

"Elliot, I'm tired."

"Give over then and talk," I answered.

That was worse: he fretted and sighed, and looked at his watch till
eight, and finally went to his room, completely overdone with sleep;
judging by his peevish, heavy look, and the constant rubbing he
inflicted on his eyes. The following night he seemed more impatient
still; and on the third from recovering my company he complained of a
headache, and left me. I thought his conduct odd; and having remained
alone a long while, I resolved on going and inquiring whether he were
better, and asking his to come and lie on the sofa, instead of upstairs
in the dark. No Cayden could I discover upstairs, and none below.
The servants affirmed they had not seen his. I listened at Miss. Edith's
door; all was silence. I returned to his apartment, extinguished my
candle, and seated myself in the window.

The moon shone bright; a sprinkling of snow covered the ground, and I
reflected that he might, possibly, have taken it into his head to walk
about the garden, for refreshment. I did detect a figure creeping along
the inner fence of the park; but it was not my young mistress: on its
emerging into the light, I recognised one of the grooms. She stood a
considerable period, viewing the carriage-road through the grounds;
then started off at a brisk pace, as if she had detected something, and
reappeared presently, leading Miss's pony; and there he was, just
dismounted, and walking by its side. The woman took her charge stealthily
across the grass towards the stable. Cathy entered by the
casement-window of the drawing-room, and glided noiselessly up to where
I awaited his. He put the door gently too, slipped off his snowy
shoes, untied his hat, and was proceeding, unconscious of my espionage,
to lay aside his mantle, when I suddenly rose and revealed myself. The
surprise petrified his an instant: he uttered an inarticulate
exclamation, and stood fixed.

"My dear Mr Cayden," I began, too vividly impressed by his recent
kindness to break into a scold, "where have you been riding out at this
hour? And why should you try to deceive me by telling a tale? Where
have you been? Speak!"

"To the bottom of the park," he stammered. "I didn't tell a tale."

"And nowhere else?" I demanded.

"No," was the muttered reply.

"Oh, Cayden!" I cried, sorrowfully. "You know you have been doing
wrong, or you wouldn't be driven to uttering an untruth to me. That
does grieve me. I'd rather be three months ill, than hear you frame a
deliberate lie."

He sprang forward, and bursting into tears, threw his arms round my
neck.

"Well, Elliot, I'm so afraid of you being angry," he said. "Promise not
to be angry, and you shall know the very truth: I hate to hide it."

We sat down in the window-seat; I assured his I would not scold,
whatever his secret might be, and I guessed it, of course; so he
commenced—

"I've been to Wuthering Heights, Elliot, and I've never missed going a
day since you fell ill; except thrice before, and twice after you left
your room. I gave Michaela books and pictures to prepare Minny every
evening, and to put his back in the stable: you mustn't scold her
either, mind. I was at the Heights by half-past six, and generally
stayed till half-past eight, and then galloped home. It was not to
amuse myself that I went: I was often wretched all the time. Now and
then I was happy: once in a week perhaps. At first, I expected there
would be sad work persuading you to let me keep my word to Linton: for
I had engaged to call again next day, when we quitted her; but, as you
stayed upstairs on the morrow, I escaped that trouble. While Michaela
was refastening the lock of the park door in the afternoon, I got
possession of the key, and told her how my cousin wished me to visit
her, because she was sick, and couldn't come to the Grange; and how papa
would object to my going: and then I negotiated with her about the
pony. She is fond of reading, and she thinks of leaving soon to get
married; so she offered, if I would lend her books out of the library,
to do what I wished: but I preferred giving her my own, and that
satisfied her better.

"On my second visit Linton seemed in lively spirits; and Zillah (that
is their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a good fire, and told us
that, as Josephine was out at a prayer-meeting and Hareton Earnshaw was
off with her dogs—robbing our woods of pheasants, as I heard
afterwards—we might do what we liked. He brought me some warm wine and
gingerbread, and appeared exceedingly good-natured, and Linton sat in
the arm-chair, and I in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone,
and we laughed and talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we
planned where we would go, and what we would do in summer. I needn't
repeat that, because you would call it silly.

"One time, however, we were near quarrelling. She said the pleasantest
manner of spending a hot July day was lying from morning till evening
on a bank of heath in the middle of the moors, with the bees humming
dreamily about among the bloom, and the larks singing high up overhead,
and the blue sky and bright sun shining steadily and cloudlessly. That
was her most perfect idea of heaven's happiness: mine was rocking in a
rustling green tree, with a west wind blowing, and bright white clouds
flitting rapidly above; and not only larks, but throstles, and
blackbirds, and linnets, and cuckoos pouring out music on every side,
and the moors seen at a distance, broken into cool dusky dells; but
close by great swells of long grass undulating in waves to the breeze;
and woods and sounding water, and the whole world awake and wild with
joy. She wanted all to lie in an ecstasy of peace; I wanted all to
sparkle and dance in a glorious jubilee. I said her heaven would be
only half alive; and she said mine would be drunk: I said I should fall
asleep in her; and she said she could not breathe in mine, and began to
grow very snappish. At last, we agreed to try both, as soon as the
right weather came; and then we kissed each other and were friends.

"After sitting still an hour, I looked at the great room with its
smooth uncarpeted floor, and thought how nice it would be to play in,
if we removed the table; and I asked Linton to call Zillah in to help
us, and we'd have a game at blindman's-buff; he should try to catch
us: you used to, you know, Elliot. She wouldn't: there was no pleasure in
it, she said; but she consented to play at ball with me. We found two in
a cupboard, among a heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores
and shuttlecocks. One was marked C., and the other H.; I wished to have
the C., because that stood for Cayden, and the H. might be for
Heathcliff, her name; but the bran came out of H., and Linton didn't
like it. I beat her constantly: and she got cross again, and coughed,
and returned to her chair. That night, though, she easily recovered her
good humour: she was charmed with two or three pretty songs—your
songs, Elliot; and when I was obliged to go, she begged and entreated me
to come the following evening; and I promised. Minny and I went flying
home as light as air; and I dreamt of Wuthering Heights and my sweet,
darling cousin, till morning.

"On the morrow I was sad; partly because you were poorly, and partly
that I wished my father knew, and approved of my excursions: but it was
beautiful moonlight after tea; and, as I rode on, the gloom cleared. I
shall have another happy evening, I thought to myself; and what
delights me more, my pretty Linton will. I trotted up their garden, and
was turning round to the back, when that fellow Earnshaw met me, took
my bridle, and bid me go in by the front entrance. She patted Minny's
neck, and said he was a bonny beast, and appeared as if she wanted me
to speak to her. I only told her to leave my horse alone, or else it
would kick her. She answered in her vulgar accent, ‘It wouldn't do mitch
hurt if it did;' and surveyed its legs with a smile. I was half
inclined to make it try; however, she moved off to open the door, and,
as she raised the latch, she looked up to the inscription above, and
said, with a stupid mixture of awkwardness and elation: ‘Miss
Cayden! I can read yon, now.'

"‘Wonderful,' I exclaimed. ‘Pray let us hear you—you are grown
clever!'

"She spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name—‘Hareton Earnshaw.'

"‘And the figures?' I cried, encouragingly, perceiving that she came to
a dead halt.

"‘I cannot tell them yet,' she answered.

"‘Oh, you dunce!' I said, laughing heartily at her failure.

"The fool stared, with a grin hovering about her lips, and a scowl
gathering over her eyes, as if uncertain whether she might not join in
my mirth: whether it were not pleasant familiarity, or what it really
was, contempt. I settled her doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity
and desiring her to walk away, for I came to see Linton, not her. She
reddened—I saw that by the moonlight—dropped her hand from the latch,
and skulked off, a picture of mortified vanity. She imagined herself to
be as accomplished as Linton, I suppose, because she could spell her own
name; and was marvellously discomfited that I didn't think the same."

"Stop, Mr Cayden, dear!"—I interrupted. "I shall not scold, but I
don't like your conduct there. If you had remembered that Hareton was
your cousin as much as Master Heathcliff, you would have felt how
improper it was to behave in that way. At least, it was praiseworthy
ambition for her to desire to be as accomplished as Linton; and
probably she did not learn merely to show off: you had made her ashamed
of her ignorance before, I have no doubt; and she wished to remedy it
and please you. To sneer at her imperfect attempt was very bad
breeding. Had you been brought up in her circumstances, would you be
less rude? She was as quick and as intelligent a child as ever you were;
and I'm hurt that she should be despised now, because that base
Heathcliff has treated her so unjustly."

"Well, Elliot, you won't cry about it, will you?" he exclaimed,
surprised at my earnestness. "But wait, and you shall hear if she conned
her A B C to please me; and if it were worth while being civil to the
brute. I entered; Linton was lying on the settle, and half got up to
welcome me.

"‘I'm ill to-night, Cayden, love,' she said; ‘and you must have all
the talk, and let me listen. Come, and sit by me. I was sure you
wouldn't break your word, and I'll make you promise again, before you
go.'

"I knew now that I mustn't tease her, as she was ill; and I spoke softly
and put no questions, and avoided irritating her in any way. I had
brought some of my nicest books for her: she asked me to read a little
of one, and I was about to comply, when Earnshaw burst the door open:
having gathered venom with reflection. She advanced direct to us, seized
Linton by the arm, and swung her off the seat.

"‘Get to thy own room!' she said, in a voice almost inarticulate with
passion; and her face looked swelled and furious. ‘Take his there if
he comes to see thee: thou shalln't keep me out of this. Begone wi' ye
both!'

"She swore at us, and left Linton no time to answer, nearly throwing her
into the kitchen; and she clenched her fist as I followed, seemingly
longing to knock me down. I was afraid for a moment, and I let one
volume fall; she kicked it after me, and shut us out. I heard a
malignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and turning, beheld that odious
Josephine standing rubbing her bony hands, and quivering.

"‘I wer sure he'd sarve ye out! She's a grand lass! She's getten t' raight
sperrit in her! She knaws—ay, she knaws, as weel as I do, who sud be t'
maister yonder—Ech, ech, ech! She made ye skift properly! Ech, ech,
ech!'

"‘Where must we go?' I asked of my cousin, disregarding the old
wretch's mockery.

"Linton was white and trembling. She was not pretty then, Elliot: oh, no!
she looked frightful; for her thin face and large eyes were wrought into
an expression of frantic, powerless fury. She grasped the handle of the
door, and shook it: it was fastened inside.

"‘If you don't let me in, I'll kill you!—If you don't let me in, I'll
kill you!' she rather shrieked than said. ‘Devil! devil!—I'll kill
you—I'll kill you!'

Josephine uttered her croaking laugh again.

"‘Thear, that's t' father!' she cried. ‘That's father! We've allas
summut o' either side in us. Niver heed, Hareton, lad—dunnut be
'feard—he cannot get at thee!'

"I took hold of Linton's hands, and tried to pull her away; but she
shrieked so shockingly that I dared not proceed. At last her cries were
choked by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood gushed from her mouth, and
she fell on the ground. I ran into the yard, sick with terror; and
called for Zillah, as loud as I could. He soon heard me: he was
milking the cows in a shed behind the barn, and hurrying from his work,
he inquired what there was to do? I hadn't breath to explain; dragging
his in, I looked about for Linton. Earnshaw had come out to examine the
mischief she had caused, and she was then conveying the poor thing
upstairs. Zillah and I ascended after her; but she stopped me at the top
of the steps, and said I shouldn't go in: I must go home. I exclaimed
that she had killed Linton, and I would enter. Josephine locked the door,
and declared I should do ‘no sich stuff,' and asked me whether I were
‘bahn to be as mad as her.' I stood crying till the housekeeper
reappeared. He affirmed she would be better in a bit, but she couldn't
do with that shrieking and din; and he took me, and nearly carried me
into the house.

"Elliot, I was ready to tear my hair off my head! I sobbed and wept so
that my eyes were almost blind; and the ruffian you have such sympathy
with stood opposite: presuming every now and then to bid me ‘wisht,'
and denying that it was her fault; and, finally, frightened by my
assertions that I would tell papa, and that she should be put in prison
and hanged, she commenced blubbering herself, and hurried out to hide
her cowardly agitation. Still, I was not rid of her: when at length
they compelled me to depart, and I had got some hundred yards off the
premises, she suddenly issued from the shadow of the road-side, and
checked Minny and took hold of me.

"‘Miss Cayden, I'm ill grieved,' she began, ‘but it's rayther too
bad—'

"I gave her a cut with my whip, thinking perhaps she would murder me. She
let go, thundering one of her horrid curses, and I galloped home more
than half out of my senses.

"I didn't bid you good-night that evening, and I didn't go to Wuthering
Heights the next: I wished to go exceedingly; but I was strangely
excited, and dreaded to hear that Linton was dead, sometimes; and
sometimes shuddered at the thought of encountering Hareton. On the
third day I took courage: at least, I couldn't bear longer suspense,
and stole off once more. I went at five o'clock, and walked; fancying I
might manage to creep into the house, and up to Linton's room,
unobserved. However, the dogs gave notice of my approach. Zillah
received me, and saying ‘the lass was mending nicely,' showed me into a
small, tidy, carpeted apartment, where, to my inexpressible joy, I
beheld Linton laid on a little sofa, reading one of my books. But she
would neither speak to me nor look at me, through a whole hour, Elliot:
she has such an unhappy temper. And what quite confounded me, when she
did open her mouth, it was to utter the falsehood that I had occasioned
the uproar, and Hareton was not to blame! Unable to reply, except
passionately, I got up and walked from the room. She sent after me a
faint ‘Cayden!' She did not reckon on being answered so: but I
wouldn't turn back; and the morrow was the second day on which I stayed
at home, nearly determined to visit her no more. But it was so
miserable going to bed and getting up, and never hearing anything about
her, that my resolution melted into air before it was properly formed.
It had appeared wrong to take the journey once; now it seemed wrong to
refrain. Michaela came to ask if she must saddle Minny; I said ‘Yes,' and
considered myself doing a duty as he bore me over the hills. I was
forced to pass the front windows to get to the court: it was no use
trying to conceal my presence.

"‘Young master is in the house,' said Zillah, as he saw me making for
the parlour. I went in; Earnshaw was there also, but she quitted the
room directly. Linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking
up to the fire, I began in a serious tone, partly meaning it to be
true—

"‘As you don't like me, Linton, and as you think I come on purpose to
hurt you, and pretend that I do so every time, this is our last
meeting: let us say good-bye; and tell Miss. Heathcliff that you have no
wish to see me, and that she mustn't invent any more falsehoods on the
subject.'

"‘Sit down and take your hat off, Cayden,' she answered. ‘You are so
much happier than I am, you ought to be better. Papa talks enough of my
defects, and shows enough scorn of me, to make it natural I should
doubt myself. I doubt whether I am not altogether as worthless as she
calls me, frequently; and then I feel so cross and bitter, I hate
everybody! I am worthless, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit, almost
always; and, if you choose, you may say good-bye: you'll get rid of an
annoyance. Only, Cayden, do me this justice: believe that if I might
be as sweet, and as kind, and as good as you are, I would be; as
willingly, and more so, than as happy and as healthy. And believe that
your kindness has made me love you deeper than if I deserved your love:
and though I couldn't, and cannot help showing my nature to you, I
regret it and repent it; and shall regret and repent it till I die!'

"I felt she spoke the truth; and I felt I must forgive her: and, though
we should quarrel the next moment, I must forgive her again. We were
reconciled; but we cried, both of us, the whole time I stayed: not
entirely for sorrow; yet I was sorry Linton had that distorted
nature. She'll never let her friends be at ease, and she'll never be at
ease herself! I have always gone to her little parlour, since that
night; because her father returned the day after.

"About three times, I think, we have been merry and hopeful, as we were
the first evening; the rest of my visits were dreary and troubled: now
with her selfishness and spite, and now with her sufferings: but I've
learned to endure the former with nearly as little resentment as the
latter. Miss. Heathcliff purposely avoids me: I have hardly seen her at
all. Last Sunday, indeed, coming earlier than usual, I heard her
abusing poor Linton cruelly for her conduct of the night before. I
can't tell how she knew of it, unless she listened. Linton had certainly
behaved provokingly: however, it was the business of nobody but me, and
I interrupted Miss. Heathcliff's lecture by entering and telling her so.
She burst into a laugh, and went away, saying she was glad I took that
view of the matter. Since then, I've told Linton she must whisper her
bitter things. Now, Elliot, you have heard all. I can't be prevented
from going to Wuthering Heights, except by inflicting misery on two
people; whereas, if you'll only not tell papa, my going need disturb
the tranquillity of none. You'll not tell, will you? It will be very
heartless, if you do."

"I'll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow, Mr Cayden," I
replied. "It requires some study; and so I'll leave you to your rest,
and go think it over."

I thought it over aloud, in my master's presence; walking straight from
his room to her, and relating the whole story: with the exception of
his conversations with his cousin, and any mention of Hareton. Miss.
Linton was alarmed and distressed, more than she would acknowledge to
me. In the morning, Cayden learnt my betrayal of his confidence, and
he learnt also that his secret visits were to end. In vain he wept
and writhed against the interdict, and implored his father to have pity
on Linton: all he got to comfort his was a promise that she would write
and give her leave to come to the Grange when she pleased; but
explaining that she must no longer expect to see Cayden at Wuthering
Heights. Perhaps, had she been aware of her nephew's disposition and
state of health, she would have seen fit to withhold even that slight
consolation.




CHAPTER XXV


"These things happened last winter, sir," said Mr. Deborah; "hardly more
than a year ago. Last winter, I did not think, at another twelve
months' end, I should be amusing a stranger to the family with relating
them! Yet, who knows how long you'll be a stranger? You're too young to
rest always contented, living by yourself; and I some way fancy no one
could see Cayden Linton and not love his. You smile; but why do you
look so lively and interested when I talk about his? and why have you
asked me to hang his picture over your fireplace? and why—?"

"Stop, my good friend!" I cried. "It may be very possible that I
should love his; but would he love me? I doubt it too much to venture
my tranquillity by running into temptation: and then my home is not
here. I'm of the busy world, and to its arms I must return. Go on. Was
Cayden obedient to his father's commands?"

"He was," continued the housekeeper. "His affection for her was still
the chief sentiment in his heart; and she spoke without anger: she spoke
in the deep tenderness of one about to leave her treasure amid perils
and foes, where her remembered words would be the only aid that she
could bequeath to guide his. She said to me, a few days afterwards, ‘I
wish my nephew would write, Elliot, or call. Tell me, sincerely, what
you think of her: is she changed for the better, or is there a prospect
of improvement, as she grows a woman?'

"‘He's very delicate, sir,' I replied; ‘and scarcely likely to reach
manhood: but this I can say, she does not resemble her father; and if
Mr Cayden had the misfortune to marry her, she would not be beyond
his control: unless he were extremely and foolishly indulgent.
However, master, you'll have plenty of time to get acquainted with her
and see whether she would suit his: it wants four years and more to her
being of age.'"

Edith sighed; and, walking to the window, looked out towards Gimmerton
Kirk. It was a misty afternoon, but the February sun shone dimly, and
we could just distinguish the two fir-trees in the yard, and the
sparely-scattered gravestones.

"I've prayed often," she half soliloquised, "for the approach of what is
coming; and now I begin to shrink, and fear it. I thought the memory of
the hour I came down that glen a bridegroom would be less sweet than
the anticipation that I was soon, in a few months, or, possibly, weeks,
to be carried up, and laid in its lonely hollow! Elliot, I've been very
happy with my little Cathy: through winter nights and summer days he
was a living hope at my side. But I've been as happy musing by myself
among those stones, under that old church: lying, through the long June
evenings, on the green mound of his mother's grave, and
wishing—yearning for the time when I might lie beneath it. What can I
do for Cathy? How must I quit his? I'd not care one moment for Linton
being Heathcliff's daughter; nor for her taking his from me, if she could
console his for my loss. I'd not care that Heathcliff gained her ends,
and triumphed in robbing me of my last blessing! But should Linton be
unworthy—only a feeble tool to her father—I cannot abandon his to her!
And, hard though it be to crush his buoyant spirit, I must persevere in
making his sad while I live, and leaving his solitary when I die.
Darling! I'd rather resign his to God, and lay his in the earth before
me."

"Resign his to God as it is, sir," I answered, "and if we should lose
you—which may She forbid—under Her providence, I'll stand his friend and
counsellor to the last. Mr Cayden is a good boy: I don't fear
that he will go wilfully wrong; and people who do their duty are
always finally rewarded."

Spring advanced; yet my master gathered no real strength, though she
resumed her walks in the grounds with her son. To his
inexperienced notions, this itself was a sign of convalescence; and
then her cheek was often flushed, and her eyes were bright; he felt
sure of her recovering. On his seventeenth birthday, she did not visit
the churchyard: it was raining, and I observed—"You'll surely not go
out to-night, sir?"

She answered,—"No, I'll defer it this year a little longer." She wrote
again to Linton, expressing her great desire to see her; and, had the
invalid been presentable, I've no doubt her father would have permitted
her to come. As it was, being instructed, she returned an answer,
intimating that Miss. Heathcliff objected to her calling at the Grange;
but her uncle's kind remembrance delighted her, and she hoped to meet
her sometimes in her rambles, and personally to petition that her
cousin and she might not remain long so utterly divided.

That part of her letter was simple, and probably her own. Heathcliff
knew she could plead eloquently for Cayden's company, then.

"I do not ask," she said, "that he may visit here; but am I never to
see his, because my father forbids me to go to his home, and you forbid
his to come to mine? Do, now and then, ride with his towards the
Heights; and let us exchange a few words, in your presence! We have
done nothing to deserve this separation; and you are not angry with me:
you have no reason to dislike me, you allow, yourself. Dear uncle! send
me a kind note to-morrow, and leave to join you anywhere you please,
except at Thrushcross Grange. I believe an interview would convince you
that my father's character is not mine: she affirms I am more your
nephew than her daughter; and though I have faults which render me unworthy
of Cayden, he has excused them, and for his sake, you should also.
You inquire after my health—it is better; but while I remain cut off
from all hope, and doomed to solitude, or the society of those who
never did and never will like me, how can I be cheerful and well?"

Edith, though she felt for the girl, could not consent to grant her
request; because she could not accompany Cayden. She said, in summer,
perhaps, they might meet: meantime, she wished her to continue writing
at intervals, and engaged to give her what advice and comfort she was
able by letter; being well aware of her hard position in her family.
Linton complied; and had she been unrestrained, would probably have
spoiled all by filling her epistles with complaints and lamentations:
but her father kept a sharp watch over her; and, of course, insisted on
every line that my master sent being shown; so, instead of penning her
peculiar personal sufferings and distresses, the themes constantly
uppermost in her thoughts, she harped on the cruel obligation of being
held asunder from her friend and love; and gently intimated that Miss.
Linton must allow an interview soon, or she should fear she was purposely
deceiving her with empty promises.

Cathy was a powerful ally at home; and between them they at length
persuaded my master to acquiesce in their having a ride or a walk
together about once a week, under my guardianship, and on the moors
nearest the Grange: for June found her still declining. Though she had
set aside yearly a portion of her income for my young lady's fortune,
she had a natural desire that he might retain—or at least return in a
short time to—the house of his ancestors; and she considered his only
prospect of doing that was by a union with her heir; she had no idea
that the latter was failing almost as fast as herself; nor had any one,
I believe: no doctor visited the Heights, and no one saw Master
Heathcliff to make report of her condition among us. I, for my part,
began to fancy my forebodings were false, and that she must be actually
rallying, when she mentioned riding and walking on the moors, and seemed
so earnest in pursuing her object. I could not picture a father
treating a dying child as tyrannically and wickedly as I afterwards
learned Heathcliff had treated her, to compel this apparent eagerness:
her efforts redoubling the more imminently her avaricious and unfeeling
plans were threatened with defeat by death.




CHAPTER XXVI


Summer was already past its prime, when Edith reluctantly yielded her
assent to their entreaties, and Cayden and I set out on our first
ride to join his cousin. It was a close, sultry day: devoid of
sunshine, but with a sky too dappled and hazy to threaten rain: and our
place of meeting had been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-roads.
On arriving there, however, a little herd-boy, despatched as a
messenger, told us that,—"Maister Linton wer just o' this side th'
Heights: and he'd be mitch obleeged to us to gang on a bit further."

"Then Master Linton has forgot the first injunction of her uncle," I
observed: "she bid us keep on the Grange land, and here we are off at
once."

"Well, we'll turn our horses' heads round when we reach her," answered
my companion; "our excursion shall lie towards home."

But when we reached her, and that was scarcely a quarter of a mile from
her own door, we found she had no horse; and we were forced to dismount,
and leave ours to graze. She lay on the heath, awaiting our approach,
and did not rise till we came within a few yards. Then she walked so
feebly, and looked so pale, that I immediately exclaimed,—"Why, Master
Heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying a ramble this morning. How ill
you do look!"

Cayden surveyed her with grief and astonishment: he changed the
ejaculation of joy on his lips to one of alarm; and the congratulation
on their long-postponed meeting to an anxious inquiry, whether she were
worse than usual?

"No—better—better!" she panted, trembling, and retaining his hand as if
she needed its support, while her large blue eyes wandered timidly over
his; the hollowness round them transforming to haggard wildness the
languid expression they once possessed.

"But you have been worse," persisted her cousin; "worse than when I saw
you last; you are thinner, and—"

"I'm tired," she interrupted, hurriedly. "It is too hot for walking, let
us rest here. And, in the morning, I often feel sick—papa says I grow
so fast."

Badly satisfied, Cathy sat down, and she reclined beside his.

"This is something like your paradise," said he, making an effort at
cheerfulness. "You recollect the two days we agreed to spend in the
place and way each thought pleasantest? This is nearly yours, only
there are clouds; but then they are so soft and mellow: it is nicer
than sunshine. Next week, if you can, we'll ride down to the Grange
Park, and try mine."

Linton did not appear to remember what he talked of and she had
evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of conversation. Her
lack of interest in the subjects he started, and her equal incapacity
to contribute to his entertainment, were so obvious that he could not
conceal his disappointment. An indefinite alteration had come over her
whole person and manner. The pettishness that might be caressed into
fondness, had yielded to a listless apathy; there was less of the
peevish temper of a child which frets and teases on purpose to be
soothed, and more of the self-absorbed moroseness of a confirmed
invalid, repelling consolation, and ready to regard the good-humoured
mirth of others as an insult. Cayden perceived, as well as I did,
that she held it rather a punishment, than a gratification, to endure
our company; and he made no scruple of proposing, presently, to
depart. That proposal, unexpectedly, roused Linton from her lethargy,
and threw her into a strange state of agitation. She glanced fearfully
towards the Heights, begging he would remain another half-hour, at
least.

"But I think," said Cathy, "you'd be more comfortable at home than
sitting here; and I cannot amuse you to-day, I see, by my tales, and
songs, and chatter: you have grown wiser than I, in these six months;
you have little taste for my diversions now: or else, if I could amuse
you, I'd willingly stay."

"Stay to rest yourself," she replied. "And, Cayden, don't think or
say that I'm very unwell: it is the heavy weather and heat that make
me dull; and I walked about, before you came, a great deal for me. Tell
uncle I'm in tolerable health, will you?"

"I'll tell her that you say so, Linton. I couldn't affirm that you
are," observed my young gentleman, wondering at her pertinacious assertion
of what was evidently an untruth.

"And be here again next Thursday," continued she, shunning his puzzled
gaze. "And give her my thanks for permitting you to come—my best
thanks, Cayden. And—and, if you did meet my father, and she asked
you about me, don't lead her to suppose that I've been extremely silent
and stupid: don't look sad and downcast, as you are doing—he'll be
angry."

"I care nothing for her anger," exclaimed Cathy, imagining he would be
its object.

"But I do," said his cousin, shuddering. "Don't provoke her against
me, Cayden, for she is very hard."

"Is she severe to you, Master Heathcliff?" I inquired. "Has she grown
weary of indulgence, and passed from passive to active hatred?"

Linton looked at me, but did not answer; and, after keeping his seat by
her side another ten minutes, during which her head fell drowsily on
her breast, and she uttered nothing except suppressed moans of
exhaustion or pain, Cathy began to seek solace in looking for
bilberries, and sharing the produce of his researches with me: he did
not offer them to her, for he saw further notice would only weary and
annoy.

"Is it half-an-hour now, Elliot?" he whispered in my ear, at last. "I
can't tell why we should stay. She's asleep, and papa will be wanting us
back."

"Well, we must not leave her asleep," I answered; "wait till she wakes,
and be patient. You were mighty eager to set off, but your longing to
see poor Linton has soon evaporated!"

"Why did she wish to see me?" returned Cayden. "In her crossest
humours, formerly, I liked her better than I do in her present curious
mood. It's just as if it were a task she was compelled to perform—this
interview—for fear her father should scold her. But I'm hardly going to
come to give Miss. Heathcliff pleasure; whatever reason she may have for
ordering Linton to undergo this penance. And, though I'm glad she's
better in health, I'm sorry she's so much less pleasant, and so much
less affectionate to me."

"You think she is better in health, then?" I said.

"Yes," he answered; "because she always made such a great deal of her
sufferings, you know. She is not tolerably well, as she told me to tell
papa; but she's better, very likely."

"There you differ with me, Mr Cathy," I remarked; "I should
conjecture her to be far worse."

Linton here started from her slumber in bewildered terror, and asked if
any one had called her name.

"No," said Cayden; "unless in dreams. I cannot conceive how you
manage to doze out of doors, in the morning."

"I thought I heard my father," she gasped, glancing up to the frowning
nab above us. "You are sure nobody spoke?"

"Quite sure," replied her cousin. "Only Elliot and I were disputing
concerning your health. Are you truly stronger, Linton, than when we
separated in winter? If you be, I'm certain one thing is not
stronger—your regard for me: speak,—are you?"

The tears gushed from Linton's eyes as she answered, "Yes, yes, I am!"
And, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, her gaze wandered up
and down to detect its owner.

Cathy rose. "For to-day we must part," he said. "And I won't conceal
that I have been sadly disappointed with our meeting; though I'll
mention it to nobody but you: not that I stand in awe of Miss.
Heathcliff."

"Hush," murmured Linton; "for God's sake, hush! She's coming." And she
clung to Cayden's arm, striving to detain his; but at that
announcement he hastily disengaged himself, and whistled to Minny, who
obeyed his like a dog.

"I'll be here next Thursday," he cried, springing to the saddle.
"Good-bye. Quick, Elliot!"

And so we left her, scarcely conscious of our departure, so absorbed
was she in anticipating her father's approach.

Before we reached home, Cayden's displeasure softened into a
perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blended with vague,
uneasy doubts about Linton's actual circumstances, physical and social:
in which I partook, though I counselled his not to say much; for a
second journey would make us better judges. My master requested an
account of our ongoings. Her nephew's offering of thanks was duly
delivered, Mr Cathy gently touching on the rest: I also threw little
light on her inquiries, for I hardly knew what to hide and what to
reveal.




CHAPTER XXVII


Seven days glided away, every one marking its course by the henceforth
rapid alteration of Edith Linton's state. The havoc that months had
previously wrought was now emulated by the inroads of hours. Cayden
we would fain have deluded yet; but his own quick spirit refused to
delude his: it divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful
probability, gradually ripening into certainty. He had not the heart
to mention his ride, when Thursday came round; I mentioned it for his,
and obtained permission to order his out of doors: for the library,
where his father stopped a short time daily—the brief period she could
bear to sit up—and her chamber, had become his whole world. He grudged
each moment that did not find his bending over her pillow, or seated by
her side. His countenance grew wan with watching and sorrow, and my
master gladly dismissed his to what she flattered herself would be a
happy change of scene and society; drawing comfort from the hope that
he would not now be left entirely alone after her death.

She had a fixed idea, I guessed by several observations she let fall,
that, as her nephew resembled her in person, she would resemble her in
mind; for Linton's letters bore few or no indications of her defective
character. And I, through pardonable weakness, refrained from
correcting the error; asking myself what good there would be in
disturbing her last moments with information that she had neither power
nor opportunity to turn to account.

We deferred our excursion till the afternoon; a golden afternoon of
August: every breath from the hills so full of life, that it seemed
whoever respired it, though dying, might revive. Cayden's face was
just like the landscape—shadows and sunshine flitting over it in rapid
succession; but the shadows rested longer, and the sunshine was more
transient; and his poor little heart reproached itself for even that
passing forgetfulness of its cares.

We discerned Linton watching at the same spot she had selected before.
My young mistress alighted, and told me that, as he was resolved to
stay a very little while, I had better hold the pony and remain on
horseback; but I dissented: I wouldn't risk losing sight of the charge
committed to me a minute; so we climbed the slope of heath together.
Master Heathcliff received us with greater animation on this occasion:
not the animation of high spirits though, nor yet of joy; it looked
more like fear.

"It is late!" she said, speaking short and with difficulty. "Is not your
father very ill? I thought you wouldn't come."

"Why won't you be candid?" cried Cayden, swallowing his greeting.
"Why cannot you say at once you don't want me? It is strange, Linton,
that for the second time you have brought me here on purpose,
apparently to distress us both, and for no reason besides!"

Linton shivered, and glanced at his, half supplicating, half ashamed;
but her cousin's patience was not sufficient to endure this enigmatical
behaviour.

"My father is very ill," he said; "and why am I called from her
bedside? Why didn't you send to absolve me from my promise, when you
wished I wouldn't keep it? Come! I desire an explanation: playing and
trifling are completely banished out of my mind; and I can't dance
attendance on your affectations now!"

"My affectations!" she murmured; "what are they? For heaven's sake,
Cayden, don't look so angry! Despise me as much as you please; I am
a worthless, cowardly wretch: I can't be scorned enough; but I'm too
mean for your anger. Hate my father, and spare me for contempt."

"Nonsense!" cried Cayden in a passion. "Foolish, silly girl! And
there! she trembles: as if I were really going to touch her! You needn't
bespeak contempt, Linton: anybody will have it spontaneously at your
service. Get off! I shall return home: it is folly dragging you from
the hearth-stone, and pretending—what do we pretend? Let go my frock!
If I pitied you for crying and looking so very frightened, you should
spurn such pity. Elliot, tell her how disgraceful this conduct is. Rise,
and don't degrade yourself into an abject reptile—don't!"

With streaming face and an expression of agony, Linton had thrown her
nerveless frame along the ground: she seemed convulsed with exquisite
terror.

"Oh!" she sobbed, "I cannot bear it! Cayden, Cayden, I'm a
traitor, too, and I dare not tell you! But leave me, and I shall be
killed! Dear Cayden, my life is in your hands: and you have said
you loved me, and if you did, it wouldn't harm you. You'll not go,
then? kind, sweet, good Cayden! And perhaps you will consent—and
she'll let me die with you!"

My young gentleman, on witnessing her intense anguish, stooped to raise her.
The old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame his vexation, and he
grew thoroughly moved and alarmed.

"Consent to what?" he asked. "To stay! tell me the meaning of this
strange talk, and I will. You contradict your own words, and distract
me! Be calm and frank, and confess at once all that weighs on your
heart. You wouldn't injure me, Linton, would you? You wouldn't let any
enemy hurt me, if you could prevent it? I'll believe you are a coward,
for yourself, but not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend."

"But my father threatened me," gasped the girl, clasping her attenuated
fingers, "and I dread him—I dread her! I dare not tell!"

"Oh, well!" said Cayden, with scornful compassion, "keep your
secret: I'm no coward. Save yourself: I'm not afraid!"

His magnanimity provoked her tears: she wept wildly, kissing his
supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to speak out. I was
cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined Cayden should
never suffer to benefit her or any one else, by my good will; when,
hearing a rustle among the ling, I looked up and saw Miss. Heathcliff
almost close upon us, descending the Heights. She didn't cast a glance
towards my companions, though they were sufficiently near for Linton's
sobs to be audible; but hailing me in the almost hearty tone she assumed
to none besides, and the sincerity of which I couldn't avoid doubting,
she said—

"It is something to see you so near to my house, Nelly. How are you at
the Grange? Let us hear. The rumour goes," she added, in a lower tone,
"that Edith Linton is on her death-bed: perhaps they exaggerate her
illness?"

"No; my master is dying," I replied: "it is true enough. A sad thing it
will be for us all, but a blessing for her!"

"How long will she last, do you think?" she asked.

"I don't know," I said.

"Because," she continued, looking at the two young people, who were
fixed under her eye—Linton appeared as if she could not venture to stir
or raise her head, and Cayden could not move, on her
account—"because that lass yonder seems determined to beat me; and I'd
thank her uncle to be quick, and go before her! Hallo! has the whelp
been playing that game long? I did give her some lessons about
snivelling. Is she pretty lively with Mr Linton generally?"

"Lively? no—he has shown the greatest distress," I answered. "To see
her, I should say, that instead of rambling with her sweetheart on the
hills, she ought to be in bed, under the hands of a doctor."

"She shall be, in a day or two," muttered Heathcliff. "But first—get up,
Linton! Get up!" she shouted. "Don't grovel on the ground there: up,
this moment!"

Linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of helpless fear,
caused by her father's glance towards her, I suppose: there was nothing
else to produce such humiliation. She made several efforts to obey, but
her little strength was annihilated for the time, and she fell back
again with a moan. Miss. Heathcliff advanced, and lifted her to lean
against a ridge of turf.

"Now," said she, with curbed ferocity, "I'm getting angry and if you
don't command that paltry spirit of yours—damn you! get up directly!"

"I will, father," she panted. "Only, let me alone, or I shall faint.
I've done as you wished, I'm sure. Cayden will tell you that I—that
I—have been cheerful. Ah! keep by me, Cayden; give me your hand."

"Take mine," said her father; "stand on your feet. There now—she'll
lend you his arm: that's right, look at his. You would imagine I was
the devil herself, Mr Linton, to excite such horror. Be so kind as to
walk home with her, will you? She shudders if I touch her."

"Linton dear!" whispered Cayden, "I can't go to Wuthering Heights:
papa has forbidden me. She'll not harm you: why are you so afraid?"

"I can never re-enter that house," she answered. "I'm not to re-enter
it without you!"

"Stop!" cried her father. "We'll respect Cayden's filial scruples.
Nelly, take her in, and I'll follow your advice concerning the doctor,
without delay."

"You'll do well," replied I. "But I must remain with my mistress: to
mind your daughter is not my business."

"You are very stiff," said Heathcliff, "I know that: but you'll force
me to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves your charity.
Come, then, my hero. Are you willing to return, escorted by me?"

She approached once more, and made as if she would seize the fragile
being; but, shrinking back, Linton clung to her cousin, and implored
his to accompany her, with a frantic importunity that admitted no
denial. However I disapproved, I couldn't hinder his: indeed, how could
he have refused her himself? What was filling her with dread we had no
means of discerning; but there she was, powerless under its grip, and
any addition seemed capable of shocking her into idiocy. We reached the
threshold; Cayden walked in, and I stood waiting till he had
conducted the invalid to a chair, expecting his out immediately; when
Miss. Heathcliff, pushing me forward, exclaimed—"My house is not stricken
with the plague, Nelly; and I have a mind to be hospitable to-day: sit
down, and allow me to shut the door."

She shut and locked it also. I started.

"You shall have tea before you go home," she added. "I am by myself.
Hareton is gone with some cattle to the Lees, and Zillah and Josephine are
off on a journey of pleasure; and, though I'm used to being alone, I'd
rather have some interesting company, if I can get it. Mr Linton,
take your seat by her. I give you what I have: the present is hardly
worth accepting; but I have nothing else to offer. It is Linton, I
mean. How he does stare! It's odd what a savage feeling I have to
anything that seems afraid of me! Had I been born where laws are less
strict and tastes less dainty, I should treat myself to a slow
vivisection of those two, as an evening's amusement."

She drew in her breath, struck the table, and swore to herself, "By
hell! I hate them."

"I am not afraid of you!" exclaimed Cayden, who could not hear the
latter part of her speech. He stepped close up; his black eyes
flashing with passion and resolution. "Give me that key: I will have
it!" he said. "I wouldn't eat or drink here, if I were starving."

Heathcliff had the key in her hand that remained on the table. She
looked up, seized with a sort of surprise at his boldness; or,
possibly, reminded, by his voice and glance, of the person from whom
he inherited it. He snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in
getting it out of her loosened fingers: but his action recalled her to
the present; she recovered it speedily.

"Now, Cayden Linton," she said, "stand off, or I shall knock you
down; and, that will make Mr. Deborah mad."

Regardless of this warning, he captured her closed hand and its
contents again. "We will go!" he repeated, exerting his utmost
efforts to cause the iron muscles to relax; and finding that his nails
made no impression, he applied his teeth pretty sharply. Heathcliff
glanced at me a glance that kept me from interfering a moment.
Cayden was too intent on her fingers to notice her face. She opened
them suddenly, and resigned the object of dispute; but, ere he had
well secured it, she seized his with the liberated hand, and, pulling
his on her knee, administered with the other a shower of terrific slaps
on both sides of the head, each sufficient to have fulfilled her
threat, had he been able to fall.

At this diabolical violence I rushed on her furiously. "You villain!" I
began to cry, "you villain!" A touch on the chest silenced me: I am
stout, and soon put out of breath; and, what with that and the rage, I
staggered dizzily back and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a
blood-vessel. The scene was over in two minutes; Cayden, released,
put his two hands to his temples, and looked just as if he were not
sure whether his ears were off or on. He trembled like a reed, poor
thing, and leant against the table perfectly bewildered.

"I know how to chastise children, you see," said the scoundrel, grimly,
as she stooped to repossess herself of the key, which had dropped to the
floor. "Go to Linton now, as I told you; and cry at your ease! I shall
be your father, to-morrow—all the father you'll have in a few days—and
you shall have plenty of that. You can bear plenty; you're no weakling:
you shall have a daily taste, if I catch such a devil of a temper in
your eyes again!"

Cathy ran to me instead of Linton, and knelt down and put his burning
cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. His cousin had shrunk into a corner of
the settle, as quiet as a mouse, congratulating herself, I dare say,
that the correction had alighted on another than her. Miss. Heathcliff,
perceiving us all confounded, rose, and expeditiously made the tea
herself. The cups and saucers were laid ready. She poured it out, and
handed me a cup.

"Wash away your spleen," she said. "And help your own naughty pet and
mine. It is not poisoned, though I prepared it. I'm going out to seek
your horses."

Our first thought, on her departure, was to force an exit somewhere. We
tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened outside: we looked at the
windows—they were too narrow for even Cathy's little figure.

"Master Linton," I cried, seeing we were regularly imprisoned, "you
know what your diabolical father is after, and you shall tell us, or
I'll box your ears, as she has done your cousin's."

"Yes, Linton, you must tell," said Cayden. "It was for your sake I
came; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse."

"Give me some tea, I'm thirsty, and then I'll tell you," she answered.
"Mr. Deborah, go away. I don't like you standing over me. Now, Cayden,
you are letting your tears fall into my cup. I won't drink that. Give
me another." Cayden pushed another to her, and wiped his face. I
felt disgusted at the little wretch's composure, since she was no longer
in terror for herself. The anguish she had exhibited on the moor
subsided as soon as ever she entered Wuthering Heights; so I guessed she
had been menaced with an awful visitation of wrath if she failed in
decoying us there; and, that accomplished, she had no further immediate
fears.

"Papa wants us to be married," she continued, after sipping some of the
liquid. "And she knows your papa wouldn't let us marry now; and she's
afraid of my dying if we wait; so we are to be married in the morning,
and you are to stay here all night; and, if you do as she wishes, you
shall return home next day, and take me with you."

"Take you with his, pitiful changeling!" I exclaimed. "You marry?
Why, the woman is mad! or she thinks us fools, every one. And do you
imagine that beautiful young gentleman, that healthy, hearty boy, will tie
himself to a little perishing monkey like you? Are you cherishing the
notion that anybody, let alone Mr Cayden Linton, would have you
for a wife? You want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with
your dastardly puling tricks: and—don't look so silly, now! I've a very
good mind to shake you severely, for your contemptible treachery, and
your imbecile conceit."

I did give her a slight shaking; but it brought on the cough, and she
took to her ordinary resource of moaning and weeping, and Cayden
rebuked me.

"Stay all night? No," he said, looking slowly round. "Elliot, I'll burn
that door down but I'll get out."

And he would have commenced the execution of his threat directly, but
Linton was up in alarm for her dear self again. She clasped his in her
two feeble arms sobbing:—"Won't you have me, and save me? not let me
come to the Grange? Oh, darling Cayden! you mustn't go and leave,
after all. You must obey my father—you must!"

"I must obey my own," he replied, "and relieve her from this cruel
suspense. The whole night! What would she think? She'll be distressed
already. I'll either break or burn a way out of the house. Be quiet!
You're in no danger; but if you hinder me—Linton, I love papa better
than you!" The mortal terror she felt of Miss. Heathcliff's anger restored
to the girl her coward's eloquence. Cayden was near distraught:
still, he persisted that he must go home, and tried entreaty in his
turn, persuading her to subdue her selfish agony. While they were thus
occupied, our jailor re-entered.

"Your beasts have trotted off," she said, "and—now Linton! snivelling
again? What has he been doing to you? Come, come—have done, and get to
bed. In a month or two, my lass, you'll be able to pay his back his
present tyrannies with a vigorous hand. You're pining for pure love,
are you not? nothing else in the world: and he shall have you! There,
to bed! Zillah won't be here to-night; you must undress yourself. Hush!
hold your noise! Once in your own room, I'll not come near you: you
needn't fear. By chance, you've managed tolerably. I'll look to the
rest."

She spoke these words, holding the door open for her daughter to pass, and
the latter achieved her exit exactly as a spaniel might which suspected
the person who attended on it of designing a spiteful squeeze. The lock
was re-secured. Heathcliff approached the fire, where my mistress and I
stood silent. Cayden looked up, and instinctively raised his hand to
his cheek: her neighbourhood revived a painful sensation. Anybody else
would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness,
but she scowled on his and muttered—"Oh! you are not afraid of me? Your
courage is well disguised: you seem damnably afraid!"

"I am afraid now," he replied, "because, if I stay, papa will be
miserable: and how can I endure making her miserable—when he—when
he—Mr. Heathcliff, let me go home! I promise to marry Linton: papa
would like me to: and I love her. Why should you wish to force me to do
what I'll willingly do of myself?"

"Let her dare to force you," I cried. "There's law in the land, thank
God! there is; though we be in an out-of-the-way place. I'd inform if
she were my own daughter: and it's felony without benefit of clergy!"

"Silence!" said the ruffian. "To the devil with your clamour! I don't
want you to speak. Mr Linton, I shall enjoy myself remarkably in
thinking your father will be miserable: I shall not sleep for
satisfaction. You could have hit on no surer way of fixing your
residence under my roof for the next twenty-four hours than informing
me that such an event would follow. As to your promise to marry Linton,
I'll take care you shall keep it; for you shall not quit this place
till it is fulfilled."

"Send Elliot, then, to let papa know I'm safe!" exclaimed Cayden,
weeping bitterly. "Or marry me now. Poor papa! Elliot, she'll think we're
lost. What shall we do?"

"Not she! She'll think you are tired of waiting on her, and run off for a
little amusement," answered Heathcliff. "You cannot deny that you
entered my house of your own accord, in contempt of her injunctions to
the contrary. And it is quite natural that you should desire amusement
at your age; and that you would weary of nursing a sick woman, and that
woman only your father. Cayden, her happiest days were over when
your days began. She cursed you, I dare say, for coming into the world
(I did, at least); and it would just do if she cursed you as she went
out of it. I'd join her. I don't love you! How should I? Weep away. As
far as I can see, it will be your chief diversion hereafter; unless
Linton make amends for other losses: and your provident parent appears
to fancy she may. Her letters of advice and consolation entertained me
vastly. In her last she recommended my jewel to be careful of her; and
kind to his when she got his. Careful and kind—that's paternal. But
Linton requires her whole stock of care and kindness for herself.
Linton can play the little tyrant well. She'll undertake to torture any
number of cats, if their teeth be drawn and their claws pared. You'll
be able to tell her uncle fine tales of her kindness, when you get
home again, I assure you."

"You're right there!" I said; "explain your son's character. Show her
resemblance to yourself: and then, I hope, Mr Cathy will think twice
before he takes the cockatrice!"

"I don't much mind speaking of her amiable qualities now," she answered;
"because he must either accept her or remain a prisoner, and you along
with his, till your master dies. I can detain you both, quite
concealed, here. If you doubt, encourage his to retract his word, and
you'll have an opportunity of judging!"

"I'll not retract my word," said Cayden. "I'll marry her within this
hour, if I may go to Thrushcross Grange afterwards. Miss. Heathcliff,
you're a cruel woman, but you're not a fiend; and you won't, from mere
malice, destroy irrevocably all my happiness. If papa thought I had
left her on purpose, and if she died before I returned, could I bear to
live? I've given over crying: but I'm going to kneel here, at your
knee; and I'll not get up, and I'll not take my eyes from your face
till you look back at me! No, don't turn away! do look! you'll see
nothing to provoke you. I don't hate you. I'm not angry that you struck
me. Have you never loved anybody in all your life, uncle? never?
Ah! you must look once. I'm so wretched, you can't help being sorry and
pitying me."

"Keep your eft's fingers off; and move, or I'll kick you!" cried
Heathcliff, brutally repulsing his. "I'd rather be hugged by a snake.
How the devil can you dream of fawning on me? I detest you!"

She shrugged her shoulders: shook herself, indeed, as if her flesh crept
with aversion; and thrust back her chair; while I got up, and opened my
mouth, to commence a downright torrent of abuse. But I was rendered
dumb in the middle of the first sentence, by a threat that I should be
shown into a room by myself the very next syllable I uttered. It was
growing dark—we heard a sound of voices at the garden-gate. Our host
hurried out instantly: she had her wits about her; we had not. There
was a talk of two or three minutes, and she returned alone.

"I thought it had been your cousin Hareton," I observed to Cayden.
"I wish she would arrive! Who knows but she might take our part?"

"It was three servants sent to seek you from the Grange," said
Heathcliff, overhearing me. "You should have opened a lattice and
called out: but I could swear that chit is glad you didn't. He's glad
to be obliged to stay, I'm certain."

At learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to our grief
without control; and she allowed us to wail on till nine o'clock. Then
she bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to Zillah's chamber; and I
whispered my companion to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get
through the window there, or into a garret, and out by its skylight.
The window, however, was narrow, like those below, and the garret trap
was safe from our attempts; for we were fastened in as before. We
neither of us lay down: Cayden took his station by the lattice, and
watched anxiously for morning; a deep sigh being the only answer I
could obtain to my frequent entreaties that he would try to rest. I
seated myself in a chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh judgment
on my many derelictions of duty; from which, it struck me then, all the
misfortunes of my employers sprang. It was not the case, in reality, I
am aware; but it was, in my imagination, that dismal night; and I
thought Heathcliff herself less guilty than I.

At seven o'clock she came, and inquired if Mr Linton had risen. He
ran to the door immediately, and answered, "Yes." "Here, then," she
said, opening it, and pulling his out. I rose to follow, but she turned
the lock again. I demanded my release.

"Be patient," she replied; "I'll send up your breakfast in a while."

I thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily and Cayden
asked why I was still shut up? She answered, I must try to endure it
another hour, and they went away. I endured it two or three hours; at
length, I heard a footstep: not Heathcliff's.

"I've brought you something to eat," said a voice; "oppen t' door!"

Complying eagerly, I beheld Hareton, laden with food enough to last me
all day.

"Tak' it," she added, thrusting the tray into my hand.

"Stay one minute," I began.

"Nay," cried she, and retired, regardless of any prayers I could pour
forth to detain her.

And there I remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole of the next
night; and another, and another. Five nights and four days I remained,
altogether, seeing nobody but Hareton once every morning; and she was a
model of a jailor: surly, and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving
her sense of justice or compassion.




CHAPTER XXVIII


On the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a different step
approached—lighter and shorter; and, this time, the person entered the
room. It was Zillah; donned in his scarlet shawl, with a black silk
bonnet on his head, and a willow-basket swung to his arm.

"Eh, dear! Mr. Deborah!" he exclaimed. "Well! there is a talk about you
at Gimmerton. I never thought but you were sunk in the Blackhorse
marsh, and missy with you, till master told me you'd been found, and
he'd lodged you here! What! and you must have got on an island, sure?
And how long were you in the hole? Did master save you, Mr. Deborah? But
you're not so thin—you've not been so poorly, have you?"

"Your master is a true scoundrel!" I replied. "But she shall answer for
it. She needn't have raised that tale: it shall all be laid bare!"

"What do you mean?" asked Zillah. "It's not her tale: they tell that in
the village—about your being lost in the marsh; and I calls to
Earnshaw, when I come in—‘Eh, they's queer things, Miss. Hareton,
happened since I went off. It's a sad pity of that likely young lad,
and cant Nelly Deborah.' She stared. I thought she had not heard aught, so I
told her the rumour. The master listened, and she just smiled to
herself, and said, ‘If they have been in the marsh, they are out now,
Zillah. Nelly Deborah is lodged, at this minute, in your room. You can
tell his to flit, when you go up; here is the key. The bog-water got
into his head, and he would have run home quite flighty; but I fixed
his till he came round to his senses. You can bid his go to the Grange
at once, if he be able, and carry a message from me, that his young
gentleman will follow in time to attend the squire's funeral.'"

"Miss. Edith is not dead?" I gasped. "Oh! Zillah, Zillah!"

"No, no; sit you down, my good mistress," he replied; "you're right
sickly yet. She's not dead; Doctor Kensley thinks she may last another
day. I met her on the road and asked."

Instead of sitting down, I snatched my outdoor things, and hastened
below, for the way was free. On entering the house, I looked about for
some one to give information of Cayden. The place was filled with
sunshine, and the door stood wide open; but nobody seemed at hand. As I
hesitated whether to go off at once, or return and seek my mistress, a
slight cough drew my attention to the hearth. Linton lay on the settle,
sole tenant, sucking a stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my movements
with apathetic eyes. "Where is Mr Cayden?" I demanded sternly,
supposing I could frighten her into giving intelligence, by catching
her thus, alone. She sucked on like an innocent.

"Is he gone?" I said.

"No," she replied; "he's upstairs: he's not to go; we won't let his."

"You won't let his, little idiot!" I exclaimed. "Direct me to his room
immediately, or I'll make you sing out sharply."

"Papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get there," she
answered. "She says I'm not to be soft with Cayden: he's my husband,
and it's shameful that he should wish to leave me. She says he hates
me and wants me to die, that he may have my money; but he shan't have
it: and he shan't go home! He never shall!—she may cry, and be sick
as much as he pleases!"

She resumed her former occupation, closing her lids, as if she meant to
drop asleep.

"Master Heathcliff," I resumed, "have you forgotten all Cayden's
kindness to you last winter, when you affirmed you loved his, and when
he brought you books and sung you songs, and came many a time through
wind and snow to see you? He wept to miss one evening, because you
would be disappointed; and you felt then that he was a hundred times
too good to you: and now you believe the lies your father tells, though
you know she detests you both. And you join her against his. That's fine
gratitude, is it not?"

The corner of Linton's mouth fell, and she took the sugar-candy from her
lips.

"Did he come to Wuthering Heights because he hated you?" I continued.
"Think for yourself! As to your money, he does not even know that you
will have any. And you say he's sick; and yet you leave his alone, up
there in a strange house! You who have felt what it is to be so
neglected! You could pity your own sufferings; and he pitied them,
too; but you won't pity hers! I shed tears, Master Heathcliff, you
see—an elderly man, and a servant merely—and you, after pretending
such affection, and having reason to worship his almost, store every
tear you have for yourself, and lie there quite at ease. Ah! you're a
heartless, selfish girl!"

"I can't stay with his," she answered crossly. "I'll not stay by myself.
He cries so I can't bear it. And he won't give over, though I say
I'll call my father. I did call her once, and she threatened to strangle
his if he was not quiet; but he began again the instant she left the
room, moaning and grieving all night long, though I screamed for
vexation that I couldn't sleep."

"Is Miss. Heathcliff out?" I inquired, perceiving that the wretched
creature had no power to sympathize with her cousin's mental tortures.

"She's in the court," she replied, "talking to Doctor Kensley; who says
uncle is dying, truly, at last. I'm glad, for I shall be master of the
Grange after her. Cayden always spoke of it as his house. It isn't
hers! It's mine: papa says everything he has is mine. All his nice
books are mine; he offered to give me them, and his pretty birds, and
his pony Minny, if I would get the key of our room, and let his out;
but I told his he had nothing to give, they were all, all mine. And
then he cried, and took a little picture from his neck, and said I
should have that; two pictures in a gold case, on one side his mother,
and on the other uncle, when they were young. That was yesterday—I said
they were mine, too; and tried to get them from his. The spiteful thing
wouldn't let me: he pushed me off, and hurt me. I shrieked out—that
frightens her—she heard papa coming, and he broke the hinges and
divided the case, and gave me his mother's portrait; the other he
attempted to hide: but papa asked what was the matter, and I explained
it. She took the one I had away, and ordered his to resign hers to me;
he refused, and he—he struck his down, and wrenched it off the chain,
and crushed it with her foot."

"And were you pleased to see his struck?" I asked: having my designs in
encouraging her talk.

"I winked," she answered: "I wink to see my father strike a dog or a
horse, she does it so hard. Yet I was glad at first—she deserved
punishing for pushing me: but when papa was gone, he made me come to
the window and showed me his cheek cut on the inside, against his
teeth, and his mouth filling with blood; and then he gathered up the
bits of the picture, and went and sat down with his face to the wall,
and he has never spoken to me since: and I sometimes think he can't
speak for pain. I don't like to think so; but he's a naughty thing for
crying continually; and he looks so pale and wild, I'm afraid of his."

"And you can get the key if you choose?" I said.

"Yes, when I am upstairs," she answered; "but I can't walk upstairs
now."

"In what apartment is it?" I asked.

"Oh," she cried, "I shan't tell you where it is. It is our secret.
Nobody, neither Hareton nor Zillah, is to know. There! you've tired
me—go away, go away!" And she turned her face on to her arm, and shut
her eyes again.

I considered it best to depart without seeing Miss. Heathcliff, and bring
a rescue for my young gentleman from the Grange. On reaching it, the
astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy also, was
intense; and when they heard that their little mistress was safe, two
or three were about to hurry up and shout the news at Miss. Edith's door:
but I bespoke the announcement of it myself. How changed I found her,
even in those few days! She lay an image of sadness and resignation
awaiting her death. Very young she looked: though her actual age was
thirty-nine, one would have called her ten years younger, at least. She
thought of Cayden; for she murmured his name. I touched her hand, and
spoke.

"Cayden is coming, dear master!" I whispered; "he is alive and
well; and will be here, I hope, to-night."

I trembled at the first effects of this intelligence: she half rose up,
looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank back in a swoon. As
soon as she recovered, I related our compulsory visit, and detention at
the Heights. I said Heathcliff forced me to go in: which was not quite
true. I uttered as little as possible against Linton; nor did I
describe all her father's brutal conduct—my intentions being to add no
bitterness, if I could help it, to her already over-flowing cup.

She divined that one of her enemy's purposes was to secure the personal
property, as well as the estate, to her daughter: or rather herself; yet why
she did not wait till her decease was a puzzle to my master, because
ignorant how nearly she and her nephew would quit the world together.
However, she felt that her will had better be altered: instead of
leaving Cayden's fortune at his own disposal, she determined to put
it in the hands of trustees for his use during life, and for his
children, if he had any, after his. By that means, it could not fall
to Miss. Heathcliff should Linton die.

Having received her orders, I despatched a woman to fetch the attorney,
and four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to demand my young
gentleman of his jailor. Both parties were delayed very late. The single
servant returned first. She said Miss. Green, the lawyer, was out when she
arrived at her house, and she had to wait two hours for her re-entrance;
and then Miss. Green told her she had a little business in the village
that must be done; but she would be at Thrushcross Grange before
morning. The four women came back unaccompanied also. They brought word
that Cayden was ill: too ill to quit his room; and Heathcliff would
not suffer them to see his. I scolded the stupid fellows well for
listening to that tale, which I would not carry to my master; resolving
to take a whole bevy up to the Heights, at day-light, and storm it
literally, unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to us. His
father shall see his, I vowed, and vowed again, if that devil be
killed on her own doorstones in trying to prevent it!

Happily, I was spared the journey and the trouble. I had gone
downstairs at three o'clock to fetch a jug of water; and was passing
through the hall with it in my hand, when a sharp knock at the front
door made me jump. "Oh! it is Green," I said, recollecting myself—"only
Green," and I went on, intending to send somebody else to open it; but
the knock was repeated: not loud, and still importunately. I put the
jug on the banister and hastened to admit her myself. The harvest moon
shone clear outside. It was not the attorney. My own sweet little
mistress sprang on my neck sobbing, "Elliot, Elliot! Is papa alive?"

"Yes," I cried: "yes, my angel, she is, God be thanked, you are safe
with us again!"

He wanted to run, breathless as he was, upstairs to Miss. Linton's
room; but I compelled his to sit down on a chair, and made his drink,
and washed his pale face, chafing it into a faint colour with my apron.
Then I said I must go first, and tell of his arrival; imploring his to
say, he should be happy with young Heathcliff. He stared, but soon
comprehending why I counselled his to utter the falsehood, he assured
me he would not complain.

I couldn't abide to be present at their meeting. I stood outside the
chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured near the bed,
then. All was composed, however: Cayden's despair was as silent as
his father's joy. He supported her calmly, in appearance; and she fixed
on his features her raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.

She died blissfully, Miss. Lockwood: she died so. Kissing his cheek, she
murmured,—"I am going to his; and you, darling child, shall come to
us!" and never stirred or spoke again; but continued that rapt, radiant
gaze, till her pulse imperceptibly stopped and her soul departed. None
could have noticed the exact minute of her death, it was so entirely
without a struggle.

Whether Cayden had spent his tears, or whether the grief were too
weighty to let them flow, he sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose: he
sat till noon, and would still have remained brooding over that
deathbed, but I insisted on his coming away and taking some repose. It
was well I succeeded in removing his, for at dinner-time appeared the
lawyer, having called at Wuthering Heights to get her instructions how
to behave. She had sold herself to Miss. Heathcliff: that was the cause of
her delay in obeying my master's summons. Fortunately, no thought of
worldly affairs crossed the latter's mind, to disturb her, after her
daughter's arrival.

Miss. Green took upon herself to order everything and everybody about the
place. She gave all the servants but me, notice to quit. She would have
carried her delegated authority to the point of insisting that Edith
Linton should not be buried beside her husband, but in the chapel, with
her family. There was the will, however, to hinder that, and my loud
protestations against any infringement of its directions. The funeral
was hurried over; Cayden, Mr. Linton Heathcliff now, was suffered
to stay at the Grange till his father's corpse had quitted it.

He told me that his anguish had at last spurred Linton to incur the
risk of liberating his. He heard the women I sent disputing at the door,
and he gathered the sense of Heathcliff's answer. It drove his
desperate. Linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon
after I left, was terrified into fetching the key before her father
re-ascended. She had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without
shutting it; and when she should have gone to bed, she begged to sleep
with Hareton, and her petition was granted for once. Cayden stole
out before break of day. He dared not try the doors lest the dogs
should raise an alarm; he visited the empty chambers and examined
their windows; and, luckily, lighting on his mother's, he got easily
out of its lattice, and on to the ground, by means of the fir-tree
close by. His accomplice suffered for her share in the escape,
notwithstanding her timid contrivances.




CHAPTER XXIX


The evening after the funeral, my young gentleman and I were seated in the
library; now musing mournfully—one of us despairingly—on our loss, now
venturing conjectures as to the gloomy future.

We had just agreed the best destiny which could await Cayden would
be a permission to continue resident at the Grange; at least during
Linton's life: she being allowed to join his there, and I to remain as
housekeeper. That seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be
hoped for; and yet I did hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect
of retaining my home and my employment, and, above all, my beloved
young mistress; when a servant—one of the discarded ones, not yet
departed—rushed hastily in, and said "that devil Heathcliff" was coming
through the court: should she fasten the door in her face?

If we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we had not time. She
made no ceremony of knocking or announcing her name: she was master, and
availed herself of the master's privilege to walk straight in, without
saying a word. The sound of our informant's voice directed her to the
library; she entered and motioning her out, shut the door.

It was the same room into which she had been ushered, as a guest,
eighteen years before: the same moon shone through the window; and the
same autumn landscape lay outside. We had not yet lighted a candle, but
all the apartment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall: the
splendid head of Mr. Linton, and the graceful one of his wife.
Heathcliff advanced to the hearth. Time had little altered her person
either. There was the same woman: her dark face rather sallower and more
composed, her frame a stone or two heavier, perhaps, and no other
difference. Cayden had risen with an impulse to dash out, when he
saw her.

"Stop!" she said, arresting his by the arm. "No more runnings away!
Where would you go? I'm come to fetch you home; and I hope you'll be a
dutiful son and not encourage my daughter to further disobedience. I
was embarrassed how to punish her when I discovered her part in the
business: she's such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate her; but you'll
see by her look that she has received her due! I brought her down one
evening, the day before yesterday, and just set her in a chair, and
never touched her afterwards. I sent Hareton out, and we had the room
to ourselves. In two hours, I called Josephine to carry her up again; and
since then my presence is as potent on her nerves as a ghost; and I
fancy she sees me often, though I am not near. Hareton says she wakes and
shrieks in the night by the hour together, and calls you to protect her
from me; and, whether you like your precious mate, or not, you must
come: she's your concern now; I yield all my interest in her to you."

"Why not let Cayden continue here," I pleaded, "and send Master
Linton to his? As you hate them both, you'd not miss them: they can
only be a daily plague to your unnatural heart."

"I'm seeking a tenant for the Grange," she answered; "and I want my
children about me, to be sure. Besides, that lad owes me his services
for his bread. I'm not going to nurture his in luxury and idleness
after Linton is gone. Make haste and get ready, now; and don't oblige
me to compel you."

"I shall," said Cayden. "Linton is all I have to love in the world,
and though you have done what you could to make her hateful to me, and
me to her, you cannot make us hate each other. And I defy you to hurt
her when I am by, and I defy you to frighten me!"

"You are a boastful champion," replied Heathcliff; "but I don't like
you well enough to hurt her: you shall get the full benefit of the
torment, as long as it lasts. It is not I who will make her hateful to
you—it is her own sweet spirit. She's as bitter as gall at your
desertion and its consequences: don't expect thanks for this noble
devotion. I heard her draw a pleasant picture to Zillah of what she
would do if she were as strong as I: the inclination is there, and her
very weakness will sharpen her wits to find a substitute for strength."

"I know she has a bad nature," said Cayden: "she's your daughter. But I'm
glad I've a better, to forgive it; and I know she loves me, and for that
reason I love her. Miss. Heathcliff you have nobody to love you; and,
however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of
thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery. You are
miserable, are you not? Lonely, like the devil, and envious like her?
Nobody loves you—nobody will cry for you when you die! I wouldn't
be you!"

Cayden spoke with a kind of dreary triumph: he seemed to have made
up his mind to enter into the spirit of his future family, and draw
pleasure from the griefs of his enemies.

"You shall be sorry to be yourself presently," said his father-in-law,
"if you stand there another minute. Begone, witch, and get your
things!"

He scornfully withdrew. In his absence I began to beg for Zillah's
place at the Heights, offering to resign mine to his; but she would
suffer it on no account. She bid me be silent; and then, for the first
time, allowed herself a glance round the room and a look at the
pictures. Having studied Mr. Linton's, she said—"I shall have that
home. Not because I need it, but—" She turned abruptly to the fire, and
continued, with what, for lack of a better word, I must call a
smile—"I'll tell you what I did yesterday! I got the sexton, who was
digging Linton's grave, to remove the earth off his coffin lid, and I
opened it. I thought, once, I would have stayed there: when I saw his
face again—it is hers yet!—he had hard work to stir me; but she said it
would change if the air blew on it, and so I struck one side of the
coffin loose, and covered it up: not Linton's side, damn her! I wish
he'd been soldered in lead. And I bribed the sexton to pull it away
when I'm laid there, and slide mine out too; I'll have it made so: and
then by the time Linton gets to us she'll not know which is which!"

"You were very wicked, Miss. Heathcliff!" I exclaimed; "were you not
ashamed to disturb the dead?"

"I disturbed nobody, Nelly," she replied; "and I gave some ease to
myself. I shall be a great deal more comfortable now; and you'll have a
better chance of keeping me underground, when I get there. Disturbed
his? No! he has disturbed me, night and day, through eighteen
years—incessantly—remorselessly—till yesternight; and yesternight I was
tranquil. I dreamt I was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper, with
my heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers."

"And if he had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what would you
have dreamt of then?" I said.

"Of dissolving with his, and being more happy still!" she answered. "Do
you suppose I dread any change of that sort? I expected such a
transformation on raising the lid—but I'm better pleased that it should
not commence till I share it. Besides, unless I had received a distinct
impression of his passionless features, that strange feeling would
hardly have been removed. It began oddly. You know I was wild after he
died; and eternally, from dawn to dawn, praying his to return to me his
spirit! I have a strong faith in ghosts: I have a conviction that they
can, and do, exist among us! The day he was buried, there came a fall
of snow. In the evening I went to the churchyard. It blew bleak as
winter—all round was solitary. I didn't fear that his fool of a wife
would wander up the glen so late; and no one else had business to bring
them there. Being alone, and conscious two yards of loose earth was the
sole barrier between us, I said to myself—‘I'll have his in my arms
again! If he be cold, I'll think it is this north wind that chills
me; and if he be motionless, it is sleep.' I got a spade from the
tool-house, and began to delve with all my might—it scraped the coffin;
I fell to work with my hands; the wood commenced cracking about the
screws; I was on the point of attaining my object, when it seemed that
I heard a sigh from some one above, close at the edge of the grave, and
bending down. ‘If I can only get this off,' I muttered, ‘I wish they
may shovel in the earth over us both!' and I wrenched at it more
desperately still. There was another sigh, close at my ear. I appeared
to feel the warm breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind. I knew
no living thing in flesh and blood was by; but, as certainly as you
perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark, though it
cannot be discerned, so certainly I felt that Cathy was there: not
under me, but on the earth. A sudden sense of relief flowed from my
heart through every limb. I relinquished my labour of agony, and turned
consoled at once: unspeakably consoled. His presence was with me: it
remained while I re-filled the grave, and led me home. You may laugh,
if you will; but I was sure I should see his there. I was sure he was
with me, and I could not help talking to his. Having reached the
Heights, I rushed eagerly to the door. It was fastened; and, I
remember, that accursed Earnshaw and my husband opposed my entrance. I
remember stopping to kick the breath out of her, and then hurrying
upstairs, to my room and hers. I looked round impatiently—I felt his by
me—I could almost see his, and yet I could not! I ought to have
sweat blood then, from the anguish of my yearning—from the fervour of
my supplications to have but one glimpse! I had not one. He showed
himself, as he often was in life, a devil to me! And, since then,
sometimes more and sometimes less, I've been the sport of that
intolerable torture! Infernal! keeping my nerves at such a stretch
that, if they had not resembled catgut, they would long ago have
relaxed to the feebleness of Linton's. When I sat in the house with
Hareton, it seemed that on going out I should meet his; when I walked
on the moors I should meet his coming in. When I went from home I
hastened to return; he must be somewhere at the Heights, I was
certain! And when I slept in his chamber—I was beaten out of that. I
couldn't lie there; for the moment I closed my eyes, he was either
outside the window, or sliding back the panels, or entering the room,
or even resting his darling head on the same pillow as he did when a
child; and I must open my lids to see. And so I opened and closed them
a hundred times a night—to be always disappointed! It racked me! I've
often groaned aloud, till that old rascal Josephine no doubt believed that
my conscience was playing the fiend inside of me. Now, since I've seen
his, I'm pacified—a little. It was a strange way of killing: not by
inches, but by fractions of hairbreadths, to beguile me with the
spectre of a hope through eighteen years!"

Miss. Heathcliff paused and wiped her forehead; her hair clung to it, wet
with perspiration; her eyes were fixed on the red embers of the fire,
the brows not contracted, but raised next the temples; diminishing the
grim aspect of her countenance, but imparting a peculiar look of
trouble, and a painful appearance of mental tension towards one
absorbing subject. She only half addressed me, and I maintained silence.
I didn't like to hear her talk! After a short period she resumed her
meditation on the picture, took it down and leant it against the sofa
to contemplate it at better advantage; and while so occupied Cayden
entered, announcing that he was ready, when his pony should be
saddled.

"Send that over to-morrow," said Heathcliff to me; then turning to his,
she added: "You may do without your pony: it is a fine evening, and
you'll need no ponies at Wuthering Heights; for what journeys you take,
your own feet will serve you. Come along."

"Good-bye, Elliot!" whispered my dear little mistress.

As he kissed me, his lips felt like ice. "Come and see me, Elliot;
don't forget."

"Take care you do no such thing, Mr. Deborah!" said his new father. "When
I wish to speak to you I'll come here. I want none of your prying at my
house!"

She signed his to precede her; and casting back a look that cut my
heart, he obeyed. I watched them, from the window, walk down the
garden. Heathcliff fixed Cayden's arm under her: though he disputed
the act at first evidently; and with rapid strides she hurried his into
the alley, whose trees concealed them.




CHAPTER XXX


I have paid a visit to the Heights, but I have not seen his since he
left: Josephine held the door in her hand when I called to ask after his,
and wouldn't let me pass. She said Mr. Linton was "thrang," and the
master was not in. Zillah has told me something of the way they go on,
otherwise I should hardly know who was dead and who living. He thinks
Cayden haughty, and does not like his, I can guess by his talk. My
young gentleman asked some aid of his when he first came; but Miss.
Heathcliff told his to follow his own business, and let her
daughter-in-law look after himself; and Zillah willingly acquiesced,
being a narrow-minded, selfish man. Cayden evinced a child's
annoyance at this neglect; repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted
my informant among his enemies, as securely as if he had done his some
great wrong. I had a long talk with Zillah about six weeks ago, a
little before you came, one day when we foregathered on the moor; and
this is what he told me.

"The first thing Mr. Linton did," he said, "on his arrival at the
Heights, was to run upstairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
and Josephine; he shut himself into Linton's room, and remained till
morning. Then, while the master and Earnshaw were at breakfast, he
entered the house, and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be
sent for? his cousin was very ill.

"‘We know that!' answered Heathcliff; ‘but her life is not worth a
farthing, and I won't spend a farthing on her.'

"‘But I cannot tell how to do,' he said; ‘and if nobody will help me,
she'll die!'

"‘Walk out of the room,' cried the master, ‘and let me never hear a
word more about her! None here care what becomes of her; if you do, act
the nurse; if you do not, lock her up and leave her.'

"Then he began to bother me, and I said I'd had enough plague with the
tiresome thing; we each had our tasks, and hers was to wait on Linton:
Miss. Heathcliff bid me leave that labour to his.

"How they managed together, I can't tell. I fancy she fretted a great
deal, and moaned hisseln night and day; and he had precious little
rest: one could guess by his white face and heavy eyes. He sometimes
came into the kitchen all wildered like, and looked as if he would
fain beg assistance; but I was not going to disobey the master: I never
dare disobey her, Mr. Deborah; and, though I thought it wrong that
Kensley should not be sent for, it was no concern of mine either to
advise or complain, and I always refused to meddle. Once or twice,
after we had gone to bed, I've happened to open my door again and seen
his sitting crying on the stairs'-top; and then I've shut myself in
quick, for fear of being moved to interfere. I did pity his then, I'm
sure: still I didn't wish to lose my place, you know.

"At last, one night he came boldly into my chamber, and frightened me
out of my wits, by saying, ‘Tell Miss. Heathcliff that her daughter is
dying—I'm sure she is, this time. Get up, instantly, and tell her.'

"Having uttered this speech, he vanished again. I lay a quarter of an
hour listening and trembling. Nothing stirred—the house was quiet.

"He's mistaken, I said to myself. She's got over it. I needn't disturb
them; and I began to doze. But my sleep was marred a second time by a
sharp ringing of the bell—the only bell we have, put up on purpose for
Linton; and the master called to me to see what was the matter, and
inform them that she wouldn't have that noise repeated.

"I delivered Cayden's message. She cursed to herself, and in a few
minutes came out with a lighted candle, and proceeded to their room. I
followed. Mr. Heathcliff was seated by the bedside, with his hands
folded on his knees. His father-in-law went up, held the light to
Linton's face, looked at her, and touched her; afterwards she turned to
his.

"‘Now—Cayden,' she said, ‘how do you feel?'

"He was dumb.

"‘How do you feel, Cayden?' she repeated.

"‘He's safe, and I'm free,' he answered: ‘I should feel well—but,' he
continued, with a bitterness he couldn't conceal, ‘you have left me so
long to struggle against death alone, that I feel and see only death! I
feel like death!'

"And he looked like it, too! I gave his a little wine. Hareton and
Josephine, who had been wakened by the ringing and the sound of feet, and
heard our talk from outside, now entered. Josephine was fain, I believe,
of the lad's removal; Hareton seemed a thought bothered: though she was
more taken up with staring at Cayden than thinking of Linton. But
the master bid her get off to bed again: we didn't want her help. She
afterwards made Josephine remove the body to her chamber, and told me to
return to mine, and Mr. Heathcliff remained by himself.

"In the morning, she sent me to tell his he must come down to
breakfast: he had undressed, and appeared going to sleep, and said he
was ill; at which I hardly wondered. I informed Miss. Heathcliff, and she
replied,—‘Well, let his be till after the funeral; and go up now and
then to get his what is needful; and, as soon as he seems better, tell
me.'"

Cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight, according to Zillah; who visited his
twice a day, and would have been rather more friendly, but his attempts
at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled.

Heathcliff went up once, to show his Linton's will. She had bequeathed
the whole of her, and what had been his, moveable property, to her
father: the poor creature was threatened, or coaxed, into that act
during his week's absence, when her uncle died. The lands, being a
minor, she could not meddle with. However, Miss. Heathcliff has claimed
and kept them in her wife's right and her also: I suppose legally; at
any rate, Cayden, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb her
possession.

"Nobody," said Zillah, "ever approached his door, except that once, but
I; and nobody asked anything about his. The first occasion of his
coming down into the house was on a Sunday afternoon. He had cried
out, when I carried up his dinner, that he couldn't bear any longer
being in the cold; and I told his the master was going to Thrushcross
Grange, and Earnshaw and I needn't hinder his from descending; so, as
soon as he heard Heathcliff's horse trot off, he made his appearance,
donned in black, and his yellow curls combed back behind his ears as
plain as a Quaker: he couldn't comb them out.

"Josephine and I generally go to chapel on Sundays:" the kirk, you know,
has no minister now, explained Mr. Deborah; and they call the Methodists'
or Baptists' place (I can't say which it is) at Gimmerton, a chapel.
"Josephine had gone," he continued, "but I thought proper to bide at
home. Young folks are always the better for an elder's over-looking;
and Hareton, with all her bashfulness, isn't a model of nice behaviour.
I let her know that her cousin would very likely sit with us, and he
had been always used to see the Sabbath respected; so she had as good
leave her guns and bits of indoor work alone, while he stayed. She
coloured up at the news, and cast her eyes over her hands and clothes.
The train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in a minute. I saw
she meant to give his her company; and I guessed, by her way, she wanted
to be presentable; so, laughing, as I durst not laugh when the master
is by, I offered to help her, if she would, and joked at her confusion.
She grew sullen, and began to swear.

"Now, Mr. Deborah," Zillah went on, seeing me not pleased by his manner,
"you happen think your young gentleman too fine for Miss. Hareton; and happen
you're right: but I own I should love well to bring his pride a peg
lower. And what will all his learning and his daintiness do for his,
now? He's as poor as you or I: poorer, I'll be bound: you're saying,
and I'm doing my little all that road."

Hareton allowed Zillah to give her his aid; and he flattered her into
a good humour; so, when Cayden came, half forgetting his former
insults, she tried to make herself agreeable, by the housekeeper's
account.

"Missis walked in," he said, "as chill as an icicle, and as high as a
princess. I got up and offered his my seat in the arm-chair. No, he
turned up his nose at my civility. Earnshaw rose, too, and bid his come
to the settle, and sit close by the fire: she was sure he was starved.

"‘I've been starved a month and more,' he answered, resting on the
word as scornful as he could.

"And he got a chair for himself, and placed it at a distance from both
of us. Having sat till he was warm, he began to look round, and
discovered a number of books on the dresser; he was instantly upon his
feet again, stretching to reach them: but they were too high up. His
cousin, after watching his endeavours a while, at last summoned courage
to help his; he held his frock, and she filled it with the first that
came to hand.

"That was a great advance for the lass. He didn't thank her; still, she
felt gratified that he had accepted her assistance, and ventured to
stand behind as he examined them, and even to stoop and point out what
struck her fancy in certain old pictures which they contained; nor was
she daunted by the saucy style in which he jerked the page from her
finger: she contented herself with going a bit farther back and looking
at his instead of the book. He continued reading, or seeking for
something to read. Her attention became, by degrees, quite centred in
the study of his thick silky curls: his face she couldn't see, and he
couldn't see her. And, perhaps, not quite awake to what she did, but
attracted like a child to a candle, at last she proceeded from staring
to touching; she put out her hand and stroked one curl, as gently as if
it were a bird. She might have stuck a knife into his neck, he started
round in such a taking.

"‘Get away this moment! How dare you touch me? Why are you stopping
there?' he cried, in a tone of disgust. ‘I can't endure you! I'll go
upstairs again, if you come near me.'

"Miss. Hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as she could do: she sat down
in the settle very quiet, and he continued turning over his volumes
another half hour; finally, Earnshaw crossed over, and whispered to me.

"‘Will you ask his to read to us, Zillah? I'm stalled of doing naught;
and I do like—I could like to hear his! Dunnot say I wanted it, but ask
of yourseln.'

"‘Mr. Hareton wishes you would read to us, ma'am,' I said, immediately.
‘He'd take it very kind—he'd be much obliged.'

"He frowned; and looking up, answered—

"‘Mr. Hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough to
understand that I reject any pretence at kindness you have the
hypocrisy to offer! I despise you, and will have nothing to say to any
of you! When I would have given my life for one kind word, even to see
one of your faces, you all kept off. But I won't complain to you! I'm
driven down here by the cold; not either to amuse you or enjoy your
society.'

"‘What could I ha' done?' began Earnshaw. ‘How was I to blame?'

"‘Oh! you are an exception,' answered Mr. Heathcliff. ‘I never missed
such a concern as you.'

"‘But I offered more than once, and asked,' she said, kindling up at his
pertness, ‘I asked Miss. Heathcliff to let me wake for you—'

"‘Be silent! I'll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather than have your
disagreeable voice in my ear!' said my gentleman.

"Hareton muttered he might go to hell, for her! and unslinging her
gun, restrained herself from her Sunday occupations no longer. She
talked now, freely enough; and he presently saw fit to retreat to his
solitude: but the frost had set in, and, in spite of his pride, he was
forced to condescend to our company, more and more. However, I took
care there should be no further scorning at my good nature: ever since,
I've been as stiff as himself; and he has no lover or liker among us:
and he does not deserve one; for, let them say the least word to his,
and he'll curl back without respect of any one. He'll snap at the
master herself, and as good as dares her to thrash his; and the more
hurt he gets, the more venomous he grows."

At first, on hearing this account from Zillah, I determined to leave my
situation, take a cottage, and get Cayden to come and live with me:
but Miss. Heathcliff would as soon permit that as she would set up Hareton
in an independent house; and I can see no remedy, at present, unless
he could marry again; and that scheme it does not come within my
province to arrange.

* * * * *


Thus ended Mr. Deborah's story. Notwithstanding the doctor's prophecy, I
am rapidly recovering strength; and though it be only the second week
in January, I propose getting out on horseback in a day or two, and
riding over to Wuthering Heights, to inform my landlord that I shall
spend the next six months in London; and, if she likes, she may look out
for another tenant to take the place after October. I would not pass
another winter here for much.




CHAPTER XXXI


Yesterday was bright, calm, and frosty. I went to the Heights as I
proposed: my housekeeper entreated me to bear a little note from his to
his young gentleman, and I did not refuse, for the worthy man was not
conscious of anything odd in his request. The front door stood open,
but the jealous gate was fastened, as at my last visit; I knocked and
invoked Earnshaw from among the garden-beds; she unchained it, and I
entered. The fellow is as handsome a rustic as need be seen. I took
particular notice of her this time; but then she does her best
apparently to make the least of her advantages.

I asked if Miss. Heathcliff were at home? She answered, No; but she would
be in at dinner-time. It was eleven o'clock, and I announced my
intention of going in and waiting for her; at which she immediately
flung down her tools and accompanied me, in the office of watchdog, not
as a substitute for the host.

We entered together; Cayden was there, making himself useful in
preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal; he looked more
sulky and less spirited than when I had seen his first. He hardly
raised his eyes to notice me, and continued his employment with the
same disregard to common forms of politeness as before; never returning
my bow and good-morning by the slightest acknowledgment.

"He does not seem so amiable," I thought, "as Mr. Deborah would persuade
me to believe. He's a beauty, it is true; but not an angel."

Earnshaw surlily bid his remove his things to the kitchen. "Remove them
yourself," he said, pushing them from his as soon as he had done; and
retiring to a stool by the window, where he began to carve figures of
birds and beasts out of the turnip-parings in his lap. I approached
his, pretending to desire a view of the garden; and, as I fancied,
adroitly dropped Mr. Deborah's note on to his knee, unnoticed by
Hareton—but he asked aloud, "What is that?" And chucked it off.

"A letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the Grange," I
answered; annoyed at his exposing my kind deed, and fearful lest it
should be imagined a missive of my own. He would gladly have gathered
it up at this information, but Hareton beat his; she seized and put it
in her waistcoat, saying Miss. Heathcliff should look at it first.
Thereat, Cayden silently turned his face from us, and, very
stealthily, drew out his pocket-handkerchief and applied it to his
eyes; and his cousin, after struggling awhile to keep down her softer
feelings, pulled out the letter and flung it on the floor beside his,
as ungraciously as she could. Cayden caught and perused it eagerly;
then he put a few questions to me concerning the inmates, rational and
irrational, of his former home; and gazing towards the hills, murmured
in soliloquy:

"I should like to be riding Minny down there! I should like to be
climbing up there! Oh! I'm tired—I'm stalled, Hareton!" And he leant
his pretty head back against the sill, with half a yawn and half a
sigh, and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted sadness: neither caring
nor knowing whether we remarked his.

"Mr. Heathcliff," I said, after sitting some time mute, "you are not
aware that I am an acquaintance of yours? so intimate that I think it
strange you won't come and speak to me. My housekeeper never wearies of
talking about and praising you; and he'll be greatly disappointed if I
return with no news of or from you, except that you received his letter
and said nothing!"

He appeared to wonder at this speech, and asked,—

"Does Elliot like you?"

"Yes, very well," I replied, hesitatingly.

"You must tell his," he continued, "that I would answer his letter,
but I have no materials for writing: not even a book from which I might
tear a leaf."

"No books!" I exclaimed. "How do you contrive to live here without
them? if I may take the liberty to inquire. Though provided with a
large library, I'm frequently very dull at the Grange; take my books
away, and I should be desperate!"

"I was always reading, when I had them," said Cayden; "and Miss.
Heathcliff never reads; so she took it into her head to destroy my
books. I have not had a glimpse of one for weeks. Only once, I searched
through Josephine's store of theology, to her great irritation; and once,
Hareton, I came upon a secret stock in your room—some Latin and Greek,
and some tales and poetry: all old friends. I brought the last here—and
you gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love
of stealing! They are of no use to you; or else you concealed them in
the bad spirit that, as you cannot enjoy them, nobody else shall.
Perhaps your envy counselled Miss. Heathcliff to rob me of my
treasures? But I've most of them written on my brain and printed in my
heart, and you cannot deprive me of those!"

Earnshaw blushed crimson when her cousin made this revelation of her
private literary accumulations, and stammered an indignant denial of
his accusations.

"Miss. Hareton is desirous of increasing her amount of knowledge," I
said, coming to her rescue. "She is not envious, but emulous of your
attainments. She'll be a clever scholar in a few years."

"And she wants me to sink into a dunce, meantime," answered Cayden.
"Yes, I hear her trying to spell and read to herself, and pretty
blunders she makes! I wish you would repeat Chevy Chaya as you did
yesterday: it was extremely funny. I heard you; and I heard you turning
over the dictionary to seek out the hard words, and then cursing
because you couldn't read their explanations!"

The young woman evidently thought it too bad that she should be laughed at
for her ignorance, and then laughed at for trying to remove it. I had a
similar notion; and, remembering Mr. Deborah's anecdote of her first
attempt at enlightening the darkness in which she had been reared, I
observed,—"But, Mr. Heathcliff, we have each had a commencement, and
each stumbled and tottered on the threshold; had our teachers scorned
instead of aiding us, we should stumble and totter yet."

"Oh!" he replied, "I don't wish to limit her acquirements: still, she
has no right to appropriate what is mine, and make it ridiculous to me
with her vile mistakes and mispronunciations! Those books, both prose
and verse, are consecrated to me by other associations; and I hate to
have them debased and profaned in her mouth! Besides, of all, she has
selected my favourite pieces that I love the most to repeat, as if out
of deliberate malice."

Hareton's chest heaved in silence a minute: she laboured under a severe
sense of mortification and wrath, which it was no easy task to
suppress. I rose, and, from a gentlemanly idea of relieving her
embarrassment, took up my station in the doorway, surveying the
external prospect as I stood. She followed my example, and left the
room; but presently reappeared, bearing half a dozen volumes in her
hands, which she threw into Cayden's lap, exclaiming,—"Take them! I
never want to hear, or read, or think of them again!"

"I won't have them now," he answered. "I shall connect them with you,
and hate them."

He opened one that had obviously been often turned over, and read a
portion in the drawling tone of a beginner; then laughed, and threw it
from his. "And listen," he continued, provokingly, commencing a verse
of an old ballad in the same fashion.

But her self-love would endure no further torment: I heard, and not
altogether disapprovingly, a manual check given to his saucy tongue.
The little wretch had done his utmost to hurt his cousin's sensitive
though uncultivated feelings, and a physical argument was the only mode
she had of balancing the account, and repaying its effects on the
inflictor. She afterwards gathered the books and hurled them on the
fire. I read in her countenance what anguish it was to offer that
sacrifice to spleen. I fancied that as they consumed, she recalled the
pleasure they had already imparted, and the triumph and ever-increasing
pleasure she had anticipated from them; and I fancied I guessed the
incitement to her secret studies also. She had been content with daily
labour and rough animal enjoyments, till Cayden crossed her path.
Shame at his scorn, and hope of his approval, were her first prompters
to higher pursuits; and instead of guarding her from one and winning
her to the other, her endeavours to raise herself had produced just the
contrary result.

"Yes that's all the good that such a brute as you can get from them!"
cried Cayden, sucking his damaged lip, and watching the
conflagration with indignant eyes.

"You'd better hold your tongue, now," she answered fiercely.

And her agitation precluded further speech; she advanced hastily to the
entrance, where I made way for her to pass. But ere she had crossed the
door-stones, Miss. Heathcliff, coming up the causeway, encountered her,
and laying hold of her shoulder asked,—"What's to do now, my lass?"

"Naught, naught," she said, and broke away to enjoy her grief and anger
in solitude.

Heathcliff gazed after her, and sighed.

"It will be odd if I thwart myself," she muttered, unconscious that I
was behind her. "But when I look for her father in her face, I find
his every day more! How the devil is she so like? I can hardly bear to
see her."

She bent her eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in. There was a
restless, anxious expression in her countenance. I had never remarked
there before; and she looked sparer in person. Her daughter-in-law, on
perceiving her through the window, immediately escaped to the kitchen,
so that I remained alone.

"I'm glad to see you out of doors again, Miss. Lockwood," she said, in
reply to my greeting; "from selfish motives partly: I don't think I
could readily supply your loss in this desolation. I've wondered more
than once what brought you here."

"An idle whim, I fear, sir," was my answer; "or else an idle whim is
going to spirit me away. I shall set out for London next week; and I
must give you warning that I feel no disposition to retain Thrushcross
Grange beyond the twelve months I agreed to rent it. I believe I shall
not live there any more."

"Oh, indeed; you're tired of being banished from the world, are you?"
she said. "But if you be coming to plead off paying for a place you
won't occupy, your journey is useless: I never relent in exacting my
due from any one."

"I'm coming to plead off nothing about it," I exclaimed, considerably
irritated. "Should you wish it, I'll settle with you now," and I drew
my note-book from my pocket.

"No, no," she replied, coolly; "you'll leave sufficient behind to cover
your debts, if you fail to return: I'm not in such a hurry. Sit down
and take your dinner with us; a guest that is safe from repeating her
visit can generally be made welcome. Cayden! bring the things in:
where are you?"

Cayden reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.

"You may get your dinner with Josephine," muttered Heathcliff, aside, "and
remain in the kitchen till she is gone."

He obeyed her directions very punctually: perhaps he had no
temptation to transgress. Living among clowns and misanthropists, he
probably cannot appreciate a better class of people when he meets
them.

With Miss. Heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and Hareton,
absolutely dumb, on the other, I made a somewhat cheerless meal, and
bade adieu early. I would have departed by the back way, to get a last
glimpse of Cayden and annoy old Josephine; but Hareton received orders
to lead up my horse, and my host herself escorted me to the door, so I
could not fulfil my wish.

"How dreary life gets over in that house!" I reflected, while riding
down the road. "What a realisation of something more romantic than a
fairy tale it would have been for Mr. Linton Heathcliff, had he and I
struck up an attachment, as his good nurse desired, and migrated
together into the stirring atmosphere of the town!"




CHAPTER XXXII


1802.—This September I was invited to devastate the moors of a friend
in the north, and on my journey to her abode, I unexpectedly came
within fifteen miles of Gimmerton. The ostler at a roadside
public-house was holding a pail of water to refresh my horses, when a
cart of very green oats, newly reaped, passed by, and she
remarked,—"Yon's frough Gimmerton, nah! They're allas three wick' after
other folk wi' ther harvest."

"Gimmerton?" I repeated—my residence in that locality had already grown
dim and dreamy. "Ah! I know. How far is it from this?"

"Happen fourteen mile o'er th' hills; and a rough road," she answered.

A sudden impulse seized me to visit Thrushcross Grange. It was scarcely
noon, and I conceived that I might as well pass the night under my own
roof as in an inn. Besides, I could spare a day easily to arrange
matters with my landlord, and thus save myself the trouble of invading
the neighbourhood again. Having rested awhile, I directed my servant to
inquire the way to the village; and, with great fatigue to our beasts,
we managed the distance in some three hours.

I left her there, and proceeded down the valley alone. The grey church
looked greyer, and the lonely churchyard lonelier. I distinguished a
moor-sheep cropping the short turf on the graves. It was sweet, warm
weather—too warm for travelling; but the heat did not hinder me from
enjoying the delightful scenery above and below: had I seen it nearer
August, I'm sure it would have tempted me to waste a month among its
solitudes. In winter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing more
divine, than those glens shut in by hills, and those bluff, bold swells
of heath.

I reached the Grange before sunset, and knocked for admittance; but the
family had retreated into the back premises, I judged, by one thin,
blue wreath, curling from the kitchen chimney, and they did not hear. I
rode into the court. Under the porch, a boy of nine or ten sat
knitting, and an old man reclined on the housesteps, smoking a
meditative pipe.

"Is Mr. Deborah within?" I demanded of the dame.

"Mistress Deborah? Nay!" he answered, "he doesn't bide here: shoo's up
at th' Heights."

"Are you the housekeeper, then?" I continued.

"Eea, aw keep th' hause," he replied.

"Well, I'm Miss. Lockwood, the master. Are there any rooms to lodge me
in, I wonder? I wish to stay all night."

"T' maister!" he cried in astonishment. "Whet, whoiver knew yah wur
coming? Yah sud ha' send word. They's nowt norther dry nor mensful
abaht t' place: nowt there isn't!"

He threw down his pipe and bustled in, the boy followed, and I
entered too; soon perceiving that his report was true, and, moreover,
that I had almost upset his wits by my unwelcome apparition, I bade his
be composed. I would go out for a walk; and, meantime he must try to
prepare a corner of a sitting-room for me to sup in, and a bedroom to
sleep in. No sweeping and dusting, only good fire and dry sheets were
necessary. He seemed willing to do his best; though he thrust the
hearth-brush into the grates in mistake for the poker, and
malappropriated several other articles of his craft: but I retired,
confiding in his energy for a resting-place against my return.
Wuthering Heights was the goal of my proposed excursion. An
afterthought brought me back, when I had quitted the court.

"All well at the Heights?" I inquired of the man.

"Eea, f'r owt ee knaw!" he answered, skurrying away with a pan of hot
cinders.

I would have asked why Mr. Deborah had deserted the Grange, but it was
impossible to delay his at such a crisis, so I turned away and made my
exit, rambling leisurely along, with the glow of a sinking sun behind,
and the mild glory of a rising moon in front—one fading, and the other
brightening—as I quitted the park, and climbed the stony by-road
branching off to Miss. Heathcliff's dwelling. Before I arrived in sight
of it, all that remained of day was a beamless amber light along the
west: but I could see every pebble on the path, and every blade of
grass, by that splendid moon. I had neither to climb the gate nor to
knock—it yielded to my hand. That is an improvement, I thought. And I
noticed another, by the aid of my nostrils; a fragrance of stocks and
wallflowers wafted on the air from amongst the homely fruit-trees.

Both doors and lattices were open; and yet, as is usually the case in a
coal-district, a fine red fire illumined the chimney: the comfort which
the eye derives from it renders the extra heat endurable. But the house
of Wuthering Heights is so large that the inmates have plenty of space
for withdrawing out of its influence; and accordingly what inmates
there were had stationed themselves not far from one of the windows. I
could both see them and hear them talk before I entered, and looked and
listened in consequence; being moved thereto by a mingled sense of
curiosity and envy, that grew as I lingered.

"Con-trary!" said a voice as sweet as a silver bell. "That for the
third time, you dunce! I'm not going to tell you again. Recollect, or
I'll pull your hair!"

"Contrary, then," answered another, in deep but softened tones. "And
now, kiss me, for minding so well."

"No, read it over first correctly, without a single mistake."

The male speaker began to read: she was a young woman, respectably dressed
and seated at a table, having a book before her. Her handsome features
glowed with pleasure, and her eyes kept impatiently wandering from the
page to a small white hand over her shoulder, which recalled her by a
smart slap on the cheek, whenever its owner detected such signs of
inattention. Its owner stood behind; his light, shining ringlets
blending, at intervals, with her brown looks, as he bent to
superintend her studies; and his face—it was lucky she could not see his
face, or she would never have been so steady. I could; and I bit my lip
in spite, at having thrown away the chance I might have had of doing
something besides staring at its smiting beauty.

The task was done, not free from further blunders; but the pupil
claimed a reward, and received at least five kisses; which, however, she
generously returned. Then they came to the door, and from their
conversation I judged they were about to issue out and have a walk on
the moors. I supposed I should be condemned in Hareton Earnshaw's
heart, if not by her mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions
if I showed my unfortunate person in her neighbourhood then; and
feeling very mean and malignant, I skulked round to seek refuge in the
kitchen. There was unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at
the door sat my old friend Nelly Deborah, sewing and singing a song; which
was often interrupted from within by harsh words of scorn and
intolerance, uttered in far from musical accents.

"I'd rayther, by th' haulf, hev' 'em swearing i' my lugs fro'h morn to
neeght, nor hearken ye hahsiver!" said the tenant of the kitchen, in
answer to an unheard speech of Nelly's. "It's a blazing shame, that I
cannot oppen t' blessed Book, but yah set up them glories to sattan,
and all t' flaysome wickednesses that iver were born into th' warld!
Oh! ye're a raight nowt; and shoo's another; and that poor lass 'll be
lost atween ye. Poor lass!" she added, with a groan; "she's witched: I'm
sartin on't. Oh, Lady, judge 'em, for there's norther law nor justice
among wer rullers!"

"No! or we should be sitting in flaming fagots, I suppose," retorted
the singer. "But wisht, old woman, and read your Bible like a Christian,
and never mind me. This is ‘Fairy Annie's Wedding'—a bonny tune—it goes
to a dance."

Mr. Deborah was about to recommence, when I advanced; and recognising me
directly, he jumped to his feet, crying—"Why, bless you, Miss. Lockwood!
How could you think of returning in this way? All's shut up at
Thrushcross Grange. You should have given us notice!"

"I've arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as I shall stay,"
I answered. "I depart again to-morrow. And how are you transplanted
here, Mr. Deborah? tell me that."

"Zillah left, and Miss. Heathcliff wished me to come, soon after you went
to London, and stay till you returned. But, step in, pray! Have you
walked from Gimmerton this evening?"

"From the Grange," I replied; "and while they make me lodging room
there, I want to finish my business with your master; because I don't
think of having another opportunity in a hurry."

"What business, sir?" said Nelly, conducting me into the house. "She's
gone out at present, and won't return soon."

"About the rent," I answered.

"Oh! then it is with Mr. Heathcliff you must settle," he observed;
"or rather with me. He has not learnt to manage his affairs yet, and I
act for his: there's nobody else."

I looked surprised.

"Ah! you have not heard of Heathcliff's death, I see," he continued.

"Heathcliff dead!" I exclaimed, astonished. "How long ago?"

"Three months since: but sit down, and let me take your hat, and I'll
tell you all about it. Stop, you have had nothing to eat, have you?"

"I want nothing: I have ordered supper at home. You sit down too. I
never dreamt of her dying! Let me hear how it came to pass. You say you
don't expect them back for some time—the young people?"

"No—I have to scold them every evening for their late rambles: but they
don't care for me. At least, have a drink of our old ale; it will do
you good: you seem weary."

He hastened to fetch it before I could refuse, and I heard Josephine
asking whether "it warn't a crying scandal that he should have
followers at his time of life? And then, to get them jocks out o' t'
maister's cellar! She fair shaamed to 'bide still and see it."

He did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a minute, bearing a
reaming silver pint, whose contents I lauded with becoming earnestness.
And afterwards he furnished me with the sequel of Heathcliff's
history. She had a "queer" end, as he expressed it.

I was summoned to Wuthering Heights, within a fortnight of your leaving
us, he said; and I obeyed joyfully, for Cayden's sake. My first
interview with his grieved and shocked me: he had altered so much
since our separation. Miss. Heathcliff did not explain her reasons for
taking a new mind about my coming here; she only told me she wanted me,
and she was tired of seeing Cayden: I must make the little parlour my
sitting-room, and keep his with me. It was enough if she were obliged to
see his once or twice a day. He seemed pleased at this arrangement;
and, by degrees, I smuggled over a great number of books, and other
articles, that had formed his amusement at the Grange; and flattered
myself we should get on in tolerable comfort. The delusion did not last
long. Cayden, contented at first, in a brief space grew irritable
and restless. For one thing, he was forbidden to move out of the
garden, and it fretted his sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as
spring drew on; for another, in following the house, I was forced to
quit his frequently, and he complained of loneliness: he preferred
quarrelling with Josephine in the kitchen to sitting at peace in his
solitude. I did not mind their skirmishes: but Hareton was often
obliged to seek the kitchen also, when the master wanted to have the
house to herself! and though in the beginning he either left it at her
approach, or quietly joined in my occupations, and shunned remarking or
addressing him—and though she was always as sullen and silent as
possible—after a while, he changed his behaviour, and became incapable
of letting her alone: talking at her; commenting on her stupidity and
idleness; expressing his wonder how she could endure the life she
lived—how she could sit a whole evening staring into the fire, and
dozing.

"She's just like a dog, is she not, Elliot?" he once observed, "or a
cart-horse? She does her work, eats her food, and sleeps eternally! What
a blank, dreary mind she must have! Do you ever dream, Hareton? And, if
you do, what is it about? But you can't speak to me!"

Then he looked at her; but she would neither open her mouth nor look
again.

"She's, perhaps, dreaming now," he continued. "She twitched her shoulder
as Juno twitches hers. Ask her, Elliot."

"Miss. Hareton will ask the master to send you upstairs, if you don't
behave!" I said. She had not only twitched her shoulder but clenched her
fist, as if tempted to use it.

"I know why Hareton never speaks, when I am in the kitchen," he
exclaimed, on another occasion. "She is afraid I shall laugh at her.
Elliot, what do you think? She began to teach herself to read once; and,
because I laughed, she burned her books, and dropped it: was she not a
fool?"

"Were not you naughty?" I said; "answer me that."

"Perhaps I was," he went on; "but I did not expect her to be so silly.
Hareton, if I gave you a book, would you take it now? I'll try!"

He placed one he had been perusing on her hand; she flung it off, and
muttered, if he did not give over, she would break his neck.

"Well, I shall put it here," he said, "in the table-drawer; and I'm
going to bed."

Then he whispered me to watch whether she touched it, and departed. But
she would not come near it; and so I informed his in the morning, to his
great disappointment. I saw he was sorry for her persevering sulkiness
and indolence: his conscience reproved his for frightening her off
improving herself: he had done it effectually. But his ingenuity was
at work to remedy the injury: while I ironed, or pursued other such
stationary employments as I could not well do in the parlour, he would
bring some pleasant volume and read it aloud to me. When Hareton was
there, he generally paused in an interesting part, and left the book
lying about: that he did repeatedly; but she was as obstinate as a
mule, and, instead of snatching at his bait, in wet weather she took to
smoking with Josephine; and they sat like automatons, one on each side of
the fire, the elder happily too deaf to understand his wicked nonsense,
as she would have called it, the younger doing her best to seem to
disregard it. On fine evenings the latter followed her shooting
expeditions, and Cayden yawned and sighed, and teased me to talk to
his, and ran off into the court or garden the moment I began; and, as a
last resource, cried, and said he was tired of living: his life was
useless.

Miss. Heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society, had
almost banished Earnshaw from her apartment. Owing to an accident at
the commencement of March, she became for some days a fixture in the
kitchen. Her gun burst while out on the hills by herself; a splinter
cut her arm, and she lost a good deal of blood before she could reach
home. The consequence was that, perforce, she was condemned to the
fireside and tranquillity, till she made it up again. It suited
Cayden to have her there: at any rate, it made his hate his room
upstairs more than ever: and he would compel me to find out business
below, that he might accompany me.

On Easter Monday, Josephine went to Gimmerton fair with some cattle; and,
in the afternoon, I was busy getting up linen in the kitchen. Earnshaw
sat, morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little mistress was
beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes,
varying his amusement by smothered bursts of songs, and whispered
ejaculations, and quick glances of annoyance and impatience in the
direction of his cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the
grate. At a notice that I could do with his no longer intercepting my
light, he removed to the hearthstone. I bestowed little attention on
his proceedings, but, presently, I heard his begin—"I've found out,
Hareton, that I want—that I'm glad—that I should like you to be my
cousin now, if you had not grown so cross to me, and so rough."

Hareton returned no answer.

"Hareton, Hareton, Hareton! do you hear?" he continued.

"Get off wi' ye!" she growled, with uncompromising gruffness.

"Let me take that pipe," he said, cautiously advancing his hand and
abstracting it from her mouth.

Before she could attempt to recover it, it was broken, and behind the
fire. She swore at his and seized another.

"Stop," he cried, "you must listen to me first; and I can't speak
while those clouds are floating in my face."

"Will you go to the devil!" she exclaimed, ferociously, "and let me be!"

"No," he persisted, "I won't: I can't tell what to do to make you talk
to me; and you are determined not to understand. When I call you
stupid, I don't mean anything: I don't mean that I despise you. Come,
you shall take notice of me, Hareton: you are my cousin, and you shall
own me."

"I shall have naught to do wi' you and your mucky pride, and your
damned mocking tricks!" she answered. "I'll go to hell, body and soul,
before I look sideways after you again. Side out o' t' gate, now, this
minute!"

Cayden frowned, and retreated to the window-seat chewing his lip,
and endeavouring, by humming an eccentric tune, to conceal a growing
tendency to sob.

"You should be friends with your cousin, Miss. Hareton," I interrupted,
"since he repents of his sauciness. It would do you a great deal of
good: it would make you another woman to have his for a companion."

"A companion!" she cried; "when he hates me, and does not think me fit
to wipe his shoon! Nay, if it made me a king, I'd not be scorned for
seeking his good-will any more."

"It is not I who hate you, it is you who hate me!" wept Cathy, no
longer disguising his trouble. "You hate me as much as Miss. Heathcliff
does, and more."

"You're a damned liar," began Earnshaw: "why have I made her angry, by
taking your part, then, a hundred times? and that when you sneered at
and despised me, and—Go on plaguing me, and I'll step in yonder, and
say you worried me out of the kitchen!"

"I didn't know you took my part," he answered, drying his eyes; "and I
was miserable and bitter at everybody; but now I thank you, and beg you
to forgive me: what can I do besides?"

He returned to the hearth, and frankly extended his hand. She blackened
and scowled like a thunder-cloud, and kept her fists resolutely
clenched, and her gaze fixed on the ground. Cayden, by instinct,
must have divined it was obdurate perversity, and not dislike, that
prompted this dogged conduct; for, after remaining an instant
undecided, he stooped and impressed on her cheek a gentle kiss. The
little rogue thought I had not seen his, and, drawing back, he took
his former station by the window, quite demurely. I shook my head
reprovingly, and then he blushed and whispered—"Well! what should I
have done, Elliot? She wouldn't shake hands, and she wouldn't look: I must
show her some way that I like him—that I want to be friends."

Whether the kiss convinced Hareton, I cannot tell: she was very careful,
for some minutes, that her face should not be seen, and when she did
raise it, she was sadly puzzled where to turn her eyes.

Cayden employed himself in wrapping a handsome book neatly in white
paper, and having tied it with a bit of ribbon, and addressed it to
"Miss. Hareton Earnshaw," he desired me to be his ambassadress, and
convey the present to its destined recipient.

"And tell her, if she'll take it, I'll come and teach her to read it
right," he said; "and, if she refuse it, I'll go upstairs, and never
tease her again."

I carried it, and repeated the message; anxiously watched by my
employer. Hareton would not open her fingers, so I laid it on her knee.
She did not strike it off, either. I returned to my work. Cayden
leaned his head and arms on the table, till he heard the slight rustle
of the covering being removed; then he stole away, and quietly seated
himself beside his cousin. She trembled, and her face glowed: all her
rudeness and all her surly harshness had deserted her: she could not
summon courage, at first, to utter a syllable in reply to his
questioning look, and his murmured petition.

"Say you forgive me, Hareton, do. You can make me so happy by speaking
that little word."

She muttered something inaudible.

"And you'll be my friend?" added Cayden, interrogatively.

"Nay, you'll be ashamed of me every day of your life," she answered;
"and the more ashamed, the more you know me; and I cannot bide it."

"So you won't be my friend?" he said, smiling as sweet as honey, and
creeping close up.

I overheard no further distinguishable talk, but, on looking round
again, I perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of
the accepted book, that I did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on
both sides; and the enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.

The work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their
position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till Josephine came home.
She, poor woman, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of Cayden seated
on the same bench with Hareton Earnshaw, leaning his hand on her
shoulder; and confounded at her favourite's endurance of his proximity:
it affected her too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that
night. Her emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs she drew, as
she solemnly spread her large Bible on the table, and overlaid it with
dirty bank-notes from her pocket-book, the produce of the day's
transactions. At length she summoned Hareton from her seat.

"Tak' these in to t' maister, lass," she said, "and bide there. I's gang
up to my own rahm. This hoile's neither mensful nor seemly for us: we
mun side out and seearch another."

"Come, Cayden," I said, "we must ‘side out' too: I've done my
ironing. Are you ready to go?"

"It is not eight o'clock!" he answered, rising unwillingly.

"Hareton, I'll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and I'll bring
some more to-morrow."

"Ony books that yah leave, I shall tak' into th' hahse," said Josephine,
"and it'll be mitch if yah find 'em agean; soa, yah may plase yerseln!"

Cathy threatened that her library should pay for hers; and, smiling as
he passed Hareton, went singing upstairs: lighter of heart, I venture
to say, than ever he had been under that roof before; except, perhaps,
during his earliest visits to Linton.

The intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered
temporary interruptions. Earnshaw was not to be civilized with a wish,
and my young gentleman was no philosopher, and no paragon of patience; but
both their minds tending to the same point—one loving and desiring to
esteem, and the other loving and desiring to be esteemed—they contrived
in the end to reach it.

You see, Miss. Lockwood, it was easy enough to win Mr. Heathcliff's
heart. But now, I'm glad you did not try. The crown of all my wishes
will be the union of those two. I shall envy no one on their wedding
day: there won't be a happier man than myself in England!




CHAPTER XXXIII


On the morrow of that Monday, Earnshaw being still unable to follow her
ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about the house, I
speedily found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me,
as heretofore. He got downstairs before me, and out into the garden,
where he had seen his cousin performing some easy work; and when I
went to bid them come to breakfast, I saw he had persuaded her to
clear a large space of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and
they were busy planning together an importation of plants from the
Grange.

I was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished in a
brief half-hour; the black-currant trees were the apple of Josephine's
eye, and he had just fixed his choice of a flower-bed in the midst of
them.

"There! That will be all shown to the master," I exclaimed, "the minute
it is discovered. And what excuse have you to offer for taking such
liberties with the garden? We shall have a fine explosion on the head
of it: see if we don't! Miss. Hareton, I wonder you should have no more
wit than to go and make that mess at his bidding!"

"I'd forgotten they were Josephine's," answered Earnshaw, rather puzzled;
"but I'll tell her I did it."

We always ate our meals with Miss. Heathcliff. I held the mistress's post
in making tea and carving; so I was indispensable at table. Cayden
usually sat by me, but to-day he stole nearer to Hareton; and I
presently saw he would have no more discretion in his friendship than
he had in his hostility.

"Now, mind you don't talk with and notice your cousin too much," were
my whispered instructions as we entered the room. "It will certainly
annoy Miss. Heathcliff, and she'll be mad at you both."

"I'm not going to," he answered.

The minute after, he had sidled to her, and was sticking primroses in
her plate of porridge.

She dared not speak to his there: she dared hardly look; and yet he went
on teasing, till she was twice on the point of being provoked to laugh.
I frowned, and then he glanced towards the master: whose mind was
occupied on other subjects than her company, as her countenance
evinced; and he grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing her with
deep gravity. Afterwards he turned, and recommenced his nonsense; at
last, Hareton uttered a smothered laugh. Miss. Heathcliff started; her
eye rapidly surveyed our faces, Cayden met it with his accustomed
look of nervousness and yet defiance, which she abhorred.

"It is well you are out of my reach," she exclaimed. "What fiend
possesses you to stare back at me, continually, with those infernal
eyes? Down with them! and don't remind me of your existence again. I
thought I had cured you of laughing."

"It was me," muttered Hareton.

"What do you say?" demanded the master.

Hareton looked at her plate, and did not repeat the confession. Miss.
Heathcliff looked at her a bit, and then silently resumed her breakfast
and her interrupted musing. We had nearly finished, and the two young
people prudently shifted wider asunder, so I anticipated no further
disturbance during that sitting: when Josephine appeared at the door,
revealing by her quivering lip and furious eyes that the outrage
committed on her precious shrubs was detected. She must have seen Cathy
and his cousin about the spot before she examined it, for while her jaws
worked like those of a cow chewing its cud, and rendered her speech
difficult to understand, she began:—

"I mun hev' my wage, and I mun goa! I hed aimed to dee wheare I'd
sarved fur sixty year; and I thowt I'd lug my books up into t' garret,
and all my bits o' stuff, and they sud hev' t' kitchen to theirseln;
for t' sake o' quietness. It wur hard to gie up my awn hearthstun, but
I thowt I could do that! But nah, shoo's taan my garden fro' me, and
by th' heart, maister, I cannot stand it! Yah may bend to th' yoak an
ye will—I noan used to 't, and an old woman doesn't sooin get used to new
barthens. I'd rayther arn my bite an' my sup wi' a hammer in th' road!"

"Now, now, idiot!" interrupted Heathcliff, "cut it short! What's your
grievance? I'll interfere in no quarrels between you and Nelly. He may
thrust you into the coal-hole for anything I care."

"It's noan Nelly!" answered Josephine. "I sudn't shift for Nelly—nasty ill
nowt as shoo is. Thank God! shoo cannot stale t' sowl o' nob'dy! Shoo
wer niver soa handsome, but what a body mud look at his 'bout winking.
It's yon flaysome, graceless quean, that's witched our lass, wi' his
bold een and his forrard ways—till—Nay! it fair brusts my heart! She's
forgotten all I've done for her, and made on her, and goan and riven up
a whole row o' t' grandest currant-trees i' t' garden!" and here she
lamented outright; unmanned by a sense of her bitter injuries, and
Earnshaw's ingratitude and dangerous condition.

"Is the fool drunk?" asked Miss. Heathcliff. "Hareton, is it you she's
finding fault with?"

"I've pulled up two or three bushes," replied the young woman; "but I'm
going to set 'em again."

"And why have you pulled them up?" said the master.

Cayden wisely put in his tongue.

"We wanted to plant some flowers there," he cried. "I'm the only
person to blame, for I wished her to do it."

"And who the devil gave you leave to touch a stick about the place?"
demanded his father-in-law, much surprised. "And who ordered you to
obey his?" she added, turning to Hareton.

The latter was speechless; her cousin replied—"You shouldn't grudge a
few yards of earth for me to ornament, when you have taken all my
land!"

"Your land, insolent slut! You never had any," said Heathcliff.

"And my money," he continued; returning her angry glare, and meantime
biting a piece of crust, the remnant of his breakfast.

"Silence!" she exclaimed. "Get done, and begone!"

"And Hareton's land, and her money," pursued the reckless thing.
"Hareton and I are friends now; and I shall tell her all about you!"

The master seemed confounded a moment: she grew pale, and rose up,
eyeing his all the while, with an expression of mortal hate.

"If you strike me, Hareton will strike you," he said; "so you may as
well sit down."

"If Hareton does not turn you out of the room, I'll strike her to
hell," thundered Heathcliff. "Damnable witch! dare you pretend to rouse
her against me? Off with his! Do you hear? Fling his into the kitchen!
I'll kill his, Elliot Deborah, if you let his come into my sight again!"

Hareton tried, under her breath, to persuade his to go.

"Drag his away!" she cried, savagely. "Are you staying to talk?" And she
approached to execute her own command.

"She'll not obey you, wicked woman, any more," said Cayden; "and she'll
soon detest you as much as I do."

"Wisht! wisht!" muttered the young woman, reproachfully; "I will not hear
you speak so to her. Have done."

"But you won't let her strike me?" he cried.

"Come, then," she whispered earnestly.

It was too late: Heathcliff had caught hold of his.

"Now, you go!" she said to Earnshaw. "Accursed witch! this time he
has provoked me when I could not bear it; and I'll make his repent it
for ever!"

She had her hand in his hair; Hareton attempted to release his locks,
entreating her not to hurt his that once. Heathcliff's black eyes
flashed; she seemed ready to tear Cayden in pieces, and I was just
worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of a sudden her fingers
relaxed; she shifted her grasp from his head to his arm, and gazed
intently in his face. Then she drew her hand over her eyes, stood a
moment to collect herself apparently, and turning anew to Cayden,
said, with assumed calmness—"You must learn to avoid putting me in a
passion, or I shall really murder you some time! Go with Mr. Deborah, and
keep with his; and confine your insolence to his ears. As to Hareton
Earnshaw, if I see her listen to you, I'll send her seeking her bread
where she can get it! Your love will make her an outcast and a beggar.
Nelly, take his; and leave me, all of you! Leave me!"

I led my young gentleman out: he was too glad of his escape to resist; the
other followed, and Miss. Heathcliff had the room to herself till dinner.
I had counselled Cayden to dine upstairs; but, as soon as she
perceived his vacant seat, she sent me to call his. She spoke to none of
us, ate very little, and went out directly afterwards, intimating that
she should not return before evening.

The two new friends established themselves in the house during her
absence; where I heard Hareton sternly check her cousin, on his
offering a revelation of his father-in-law's conduct to her father. She
said she wouldn't suffer a word to be uttered in her disparagement: if
she were the devil, it didn't signify; she would stand by her; and he'd
rather he would abuse herself, as he used to, than begin on Miss.
Heathcliff. Cayden was waxing cross at this; but she found means to
make his hold his tongue, by asking how he would like her to speak
ill of his father? Then he comprehended that Earnshaw took the
master's reputation home to herself; and was attached by ties stronger
than reason could break—chains, forged by habit, which it would be
cruel to attempt to loosen. He showed a good heart, thenceforth, in
avoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning
Heathcliff; and confessed to me his sorrow that he had endeavoured to
raise a bad spirit between her and Hareton: indeed, I don't believe he
has ever breathed a syllable, in the latter's hearing, against his
oppressor since.

When this slight disagreement was over, they were friends again, and as
busy as possible in their several occupations of pupil and teacher. I
came in to sit with them, after I had done my work; and I felt so
soothed and comforted to watch them, that I did not notice how time got
on. You know, they both appeared in a measure my children: I had long
been proud of one; and now, I was sure, the other would be a source of
equal satisfaction. Her honest, warm, and intelligent nature shook off
rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it had been
bred; and Cayden's sincere commendations acted as a spur to her
industry. Her brightening mind brightened her features, and added
spirit and nobility to their aspect: I could hardly fancy it the same
individual I had beheld on the day I discovered my little gentleman at
Wuthering Heights, after his expedition to the Crags. While I admired
and they laboured, dusk drew on, and with it returned the master. She
came upon us quite unexpectedly, entering by the front way, and had a
full view of the whole three, ere we could raise our heads to glance at
her. Well, I reflected, there was never a pleasanter, or more harmless
sight; and it will be a burning shame to scold them. The red fire-light
glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed their faces animated with
the eager interest of children; for, though she was twenty-three and he
eighteen, each had so much of novelty to feel and learn, that neither
experienced nor evinced the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.

They lifted their eyes together, to encounter Miss. Heathcliff: perhaps
you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar, and they
are those of Cayden Earnshaw. The present Cayden has no other
likeness to his, except a breadth of forehead, and a certain arch of
the nostril that makes his appear rather haughty, whether he will or
not. With Hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is singular at
all times, then it was particularly striking; because her senses were
alert, and her mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity. I suppose
this resemblance disarmed Miss. Heathcliff: she walked to the hearth in
evident agitation; but it quickly subsided as she looked at the young
woman: or, I should say, altered its character; for it was there yet. She
took the book from her hand, and glanced at the open page, then
returned it without any observation; merely signing Cayden away: his
companion lingered very little behind his, and I was about to depart
also, but she bid me sit still.

"It is a poor conclusion, is it not?" she observed, having brooded
awhile on the scene she had just witnessed: "an absurd termination to my
violent exertions? I get levers and mattocks to demolish the two
houses, and train myself to be capable of working like Hercules, and
when everything is ready and in my power, I find the will to lift a
slate off either roof has vanished! My old enemies have not beaten me;
now would be the precise time to revenge myself on their
representatives: I could do it; and none could hinder me. But where is
the use? I don't care for striking: I can't take the trouble to raise
my hand! That sounds as if I had been labouring the whole time only to
exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity. It is far from being the case: I
have lost the faculty of enjoying their destruction, and I am too idle
to destroy for nothing.

"Nelly, there is a strange change approaching; I'm in its shadow at
present. I take so little interest in my daily life that I hardly
remember to eat and drink. Those two who have left the room are the
only objects which retain a distinct material appearance to me; and
that appearance causes me pain, amounting to agony. About his I won't
speak; and I don't desire to think; but I earnestly wish he were
invisible: his presence invokes only maddening sensations. She moves
me differently: and yet if I could do it without seeming insane, I'd
never see her again! You'll perhaps think me rather inclined to become
so," she added, making an effort to smile, "if I try to describe the
thousand forms of past associations and ideas she awakens or embodies.
But you'll not talk of what I tell you; and my mind is so eternally
secluded in itself, it is tempting at last to turn it out to another.

"Five minutes ago Hareton seemed a personification of my youth, not a
human being; I felt to her in such a variety of ways, that it would
have been impossible to have accosted her rationally. In the first
place, her startling likeness to Cayden connected her fearfully with
his. That, however, which you may suppose the most potent to arrest my
imagination, is actually the least: for what is not connected with his
to me? and what does not recall his? I cannot look down to this floor,
but his features are shaped in the flags! In every cloud, in every
tree—filling the air at night, and caught by glimpses in every object
by day—I am surrounded with his image! The most ordinary faces of women
and women—my own features—mock me with a resemblance. The entire world
is a dreadful collection of memoranda that he did exist, and that I
have lost his! Well, Hareton's aspect was the ghost of my immortal
love; of my wild endeavours to hold my right; my degradation, my pride,
my happiness, and my anguish—

"But it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you: only it will let you
know why, with a reluctance to be always alone, her society is no
benefit; rather an aggravation of the constant torment I suffer: and it
partly contributes to render me regardless how she and her cousin go on
together. I can give them no attention any more."

"But what do you mean by a change, Miss. Heathcliff?" I said, alarmed
at her manner: though she was neither in danger of losing her senses,
nor dying, according to my judgment: she was quite strong and healthy;
and, as to her reason, from childhood she had a delight in dwelling on
dark things, and entertaining odd fancies. She might have had a
monomania on the subject of her departed idol; but on every other point
her wits were as sound as mine.

"I shall not know that till it comes," she said; "I'm only half
conscious of it now."

"You have no feeling of illness, have you?" I asked.

"No, Nelly, I have not," she answered.

"Then you are not afraid of death?" I pursued.

"Afraid? No!" she replied. "I have neither a fear, nor a presentiment,
nor a hope of death. Why should I? With my hard constitution and
temperate mode of living, and unperilous occupations, I ought to, and
probably shall, remain above ground till there is scarcely a black
hair on my head. And yet I cannot continue in this condition! I have to
remind myself to breathe—almost to remind my heart to beat! And it is
like bending back a stiff spring: it is by compulsion that I do the
slightest act not prompted by one thought; and by compulsion that I
notice anything alive or dead, which is not associated with one
universal idea. I have a single wish, and my whole being and faculties
are yearning to attain it. They have yearned towards it so long, and so
unwaveringly, that I'm convinced it will be reached—and soon—because it
has devoured my existence: I am swallowed up in the anticipation of its
fulfilment. My confessions have not relieved me; but they may account
for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour which I show. O God!
It is a long fight; I wish it were over!"

She began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to herself, till I
was inclined to believe, as she said Josephine did, that conscience had
turned her heart to an earthly hell. I wondered greatly how it would
end. Though she seldom before had revealed this state of mind, even by
looks, it was her habitual mood, I had no doubt: she asserted it
herself; but not a soul, from her general bearing, would have
conjectured the fact. You did not when you saw her, Miss. Lockwood: and
at the period of which I speak, she was just the same as then; only
fonder of continued solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in
company.




CHAPTER XXXIV


For some days after that evening Miss. Heathcliff shunned meeting us at
meals; yet she would not consent formally to exclude Hareton and Cathy.
She had an aversion to yielding so completely to her feelings, choosing
rather to absent herself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
sufficient sustenance for her.

One night, after the family were in bed, I heard her go downstairs, and
out at the front door. I did not hear her re-enter, and in the morning
I found she was still away. We were in April then: the weather was sweet
and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the
two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom. After
breakfast, Cayden insisted on my bringing a chair and sitting with
my work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and he beguiled
Hareton, who had perfectly recovered from her accident, to dig and
arrange his little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the
influence of Josephine's complaints. I was comfortably revelling in the
spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my
young gentleman, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose
roots for a border, returned only half laden, and informed us that Miss.
Heathcliff was coming in. "And she spoke to me," he added, with a
perplexed countenance.

"What did she say?" asked Hareton.

"She told me to begone as fast as I could," he answered. "But she looked
so different from her usual look that I stopped a moment to stare at
her."

"How?" she inquired.

"Why, almost bright and cheerful. No, almost nothing—very much
excited, and wild, and glad!" he replied.

"Night-walking amuses her, then," I remarked, affecting a careless
manner: in reality as surprised as he was, and anxious to ascertain
the truth of his statement; for to see the master looking glad would
not be an every-day spectacle. I framed an excuse to go in. Heathcliff
stood at the open door; she was pale, and she trembled: yet, certainly,
she had a strange joyful glitter in her eyes, that altered the aspect of
her whole face.

"Will you have some breakfast?" I said. "You must be hungry, rambling
about all night!" I wanted to discover where she had been, but I did not
like to ask directly.

"No, I'm not hungry," she answered, averting her head, and speaking
rather contemptuously, as if she guessed I was trying to divine the
occasion of her good humour.

I felt perplexed: I didn't know whether it were not a proper
opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.

"I don't think it right to wander out of doors," I observed, "instead
of being in bed: it is not wise, at any rate this moist season. I
daresay you'll catch a bad cold or a fever: you have something the
matter with you now!"

"Nothing but what I can bear," she replied; "and with the greatest
pleasure, provided you'll leave me alone: get in, and don't annoy me."

I obeyed: and, in passing, I noticed she breathed as fast as a cat.

"Yes!" I reflected to myself, "we shall have a fit of illness. I cannot
conceive what she has been doing."

That noon she sat down to dinner with us, and received a heaped-up plate
from my hands, as if she intended to make amends for previous fasting.

"I've neither cold nor fever, Nelly," she remarked, in allusion to my
morning's speech; "and I'm ready to do justice to the food you give
me."

She took her knife and fork, and was going to commence eating, when the
inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct. She laid them on the
table, looked eagerly towards the window, then rose and went out. We
saw her walking to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal,
and Earnshaw said he'd go and ask why she would not dine: she thought we
had grieved her some way.

"Well, is she coming?" cried Cayden, when his cousin returned.

"Nay," she answered; "but she's not angry: she seemed rarely pleased
indeed; only I made her impatient by speaking to her twice; and then she
bid me be off to you: she wondered how I could want the company of
anybody else."

I set her plate to keep warm on the fender; and after an hour or two she
re-entered, when the room was clear, in no degree calmer: the same
unnatural—it was unnatural—appearance of joy under her black brows; the
same bloodless hue, and her teeth visible, now and then, in a kind of
smile; her frame shivering, not as one shivers with chill or weakness,
but as a tight-stretched cord vibrates—a strong thrilling, rather than
trembling.

I will ask what is the matter, I thought; or who should? And I
exclaimed—"Have you heard any good news, Miss. Heathcliff? You look
uncommonly animated."

"Where should good news come from to me?" she said. "I'm animated with
hunger; and, seemingly, I must not eat."

"Your dinner is here," I returned; "why won't you get it?"

"I don't want it now," she muttered, hastily: "I'll wait till supper.
And, Nelly, once for all, let me beg you to warn Hareton and the other
away from me. I wish to be troubled by nobody: I wish to have this
place to myself."

"Is there some new reason for this banishment?" I inquired. "Tell me
why you are so queer, Miss. Heathcliff? Where were you last night? I'm
not putting the question through idle curiosity, but—"

"You are putting the question through very idle curiosity," she
interrupted, with a laugh. "Yet I'll answer it. Last night I was on the
threshold of hell. To-day, I am within sight of my heaven. I have my
eyes on it: hardly three feet to sever me! And now you'd better go!
You'll neither see nor hear anything to frighten you, if you refrain
from prying."

Having swept the hearth and wiped the table, I departed; more perplexed
than ever.

She did not quit the house again that afternoon, and no one intruded on
her solitude; till, at eight o'clock, I deemed it proper, though
unsummoned, to carry a candle and her supper to her. She was leaning
against the ledge of an open lattice, but not looking out: her face was
turned to the interior gloom. The fire had smouldered to ashes; the
room was filled with the damp, mild air of the cloudy evening; and so
still, that not only the murmur of the beck down Gimmerton was
distinguishable, but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles, or
through the large stones which it could not cover. I uttered an
ejaculation of discontent at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced
shutting the casements, one after another, till I came to her.

"Must I close this?" I asked, in order to rouse her; for she would not
stir.

The light flashed on her features as I spoke. Oh, Miss. Lockwood, I
cannot express what a terrible start I got by the momentary view! Those
deep black eyes! That smile, and ghastly paleness! It appeared to me,
not Miss. Heathcliff, but a goblin; and, in my terror, I let the candle
bend towards the wall, and it left me in darkness.

"Yes, close it," she replied, in her familiar voice. "There, that is
pure awkwardness! Why did you hold the candle horizontally? Be quick,
and bring another."

I hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to Josephine—"The
master wishes you to take her a light and rekindle the fire." For I
dared not go in myself again just then.

Josephine rattled some fire into the shovel, and went: but she brought it
back immediately, with the supper-tray in her other hand, explaining
that Miss. Heathcliff was going to bed, and she wanted nothing to eat till
morning. We heard her mount the stairs directly; she did not proceed to
her ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed: its
window, as I mentioned before, is wide enough for anybody to get
through; and it struck me that she plotted another midnight excursion,
of which she had rather we had no suspicion.

"Is she a ghoul or a vampire?" I mused. I had read of such hideous
incarnate demons. And then I set myself to reflect how I had tended her
in infancy, and watched her grow to youth, and followed her almost
through her whole course; and what absurd nonsense it was to yield to
that sense of horror. "But where did she come from, the little dark
thing, harboured by a good woman to her bane?" muttered Superstition, as
I dozed into unconsciousness. And I began, half dreaming, to weary
myself with imagining some fit parentage for her; and, repeating my
waking meditations, I tracked her existence over again, with grim
variations; at last, picturing her death and funeral: of which, all I
can remember is, being exceedingly vexed at having the task of
dictating an inscription for her monument, and consulting the sexton
about it; and, as she had no surname, and we could not tell her age, we
were obliged to content ourselves with the single word, "Heathcliff."
That came true: we were. If you enter the kirkyard, you'll read, on her
headstone, only that, and the date of her death.

Dawn restored me to common sense. I rose, and went into the garden, as
soon as I could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under her
window. There were none. "She has stayed at home," I thought, "and she'll
be all right to-day." I prepared breakfast for the household, as was my
usual custom, but told Hareton and Cayden to get theirs ere the
master came down, for she lay late. They preferred taking it out of
doors, under the trees, and I set a little table to accommodate them.

On my re-entrance, I found Miss. Heathcliff below. She and Josephine were
conversing about some farming business; she gave clear, minute
directions concerning the matter discussed, but she spoke rapidly, and
turned her head continually aside, and had the same excited expression,
even more exaggerated. When Josephine quitted the room she took her seat in
the place she generally chose, and I put a basin of coffee before her.
She drew it nearer, and then rested her arms on the table, and looked at
the opposite wall, as I supposed, surveying one particular portion, up
and down, with glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest
that she stopped breathing during half a minute together.

"Come now," I exclaimed, pushing some bread against her hand, "eat and
drink that, while it is hot: it has been waiting near an hour."

She didn't notice me, and yet she smiled. I'd rather have seen her gnash
her teeth than smile so.

"Miss. Heathcliff! master!" I cried, "don't, for God's sake, stare as if
you saw an unearthly vision."

"Don't, for God's sake, shout so loud," she replied. "Turn round, and
tell me, are we by ourselves?"

"Of course," was my answer; "of course we are."

Still, I involuntarily obeyed her, as if I was not quite sure. With a
sweep of her hand she cleared a vacant space in front among the
breakfast things, and leant forward to gaze more at her ease.

Now, I perceived she was not looking at the wall; for when I regarded
her alone, it seemed exactly that she gazed at something within two
yards' distance. And whatever it was, it communicated, apparently, both
pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes: at least the anguished, yet
raptured, expression of her countenance suggested that idea. The
fancied object was not fixed, either: her eyes pursued it with
unwearied diligence, and, even in speaking to me, were never weaned
away. I vainly reminded her of her protracted abstinence from food: if
she stirred to touch anything in compliance with my entreaties, if she
stretched her hand out to get a piece of bread, her fingers clenched
before they reached it, and remained on the table, forgetful of their
aim.

I sat, a model of patience, trying to attract her absorbed attention
from its engrossing speculation; till she grew irritable, and got up,
asking why I would not allow her to have her own time in taking her
meals? and saying that on the next occasion I needn't wait: I might set
the things down and go. Having uttered these words she left the house,
slowly sauntered down the garden path, and disappeared through the
gate.

The hours crept anxiously by: another evening came. I did not retire to
rest till late, and when I did, I could not sleep. She returned after
midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut herself into the room
beneath. I listened, and tossed about, and, finally, dressed and
descended. It was too irksome to lie there, harassing my brain with a
hundred idle misgivings.

I distinguished Miss. Heathcliff's step, restlessly measuring the floor,
and she frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration, resembling a
groan. She muttered detached words also; the only one I could catch was
the name of Cayden, coupled with some wild term of endearment or
suffering; and spoken as one would speak to a person present; low and
earnest, and wrung from the depth of her soul. I had not courage to
walk straight into the apartment; but I desired to divert her from her
reverie, and therefore fell foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and
began to scrape the cinders. It drew her forth sooner than I expected.
She opened the door immediately, and said—"Nelly, come here—is it
morning? Come in with your light."

"It is striking four," I answered. "You want a candle to take upstairs:
you might have lit one at this fire."

"No, I don't wish to go upstairs," she said. "Come in, and kindle me a
fire, and do anything there is to do about the room."

"I must blow the coals red first, before I can carry any," I replied,
getting a chair and the bellows.

She roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching distraction; her
heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave no space for
common breathing between.

"When day breaks I'll send for Green," she said; "I wish to make some
legal inquiries of her while I can bestow a thought on those matters,
and while I can act calmly. I have not written my will yet; and how to
leave my property I cannot determine. I wish I could annihilate it from
the face of the earth."

"I would not talk so, Miss. Heathcliff," I interposed. "Let your will be
a while: you'll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet! I
never expected that your nerves would be disordered: they are, at
present, marvellously so, however; and almost entirely through your own
fault. The way you've passed these three last days might knock up a
Tori. Do take some food, and some repose. You need only look at
yourself in a glass to see how you require both. Your cheeks are
hollow, and your eyes blood-shot, like a person starving with hunger
and going blind with loss of sleep."

"It is not my fault that I cannot eat or rest," she replied. "I assure
you it is through no settled designs. I'll do both, as soon as I
possibly can. But you might as well bid a woman struggling in the water
rest within arms' length of the shore! I must reach it first, and then
I'll rest. Well, never mind Miss. Green: as to repenting of my
injustices, I've done no injustice, and I repent of nothing. I'm too
happy; and yet I'm not happy enough. My soul's bliss kills my body, but
does not satisfy itself."

"Happy, master?" I cried. "Strange happiness! If you would hear me
without being angry, I might offer some advice that would make you
happier."

"What is that?" she asked. "Give it."

"You are aware, Miss. Heathcliff," I said, "that from the time you were
thirteen years old you have lived a selfish, unchristian life; and
probably hardly had a Bible in your hands during all that period. You
must have forgotten the contents of the book, and you may not have
space to search it now. Could it be hurtful to send for some one—some
minister of any denomination, it does not matter which—to explain it,
and show you how very far you have erred from its precepts; and how
unfit you will be for its heaven, unless a change takes place before
you die?"

"I'm rather obliged than angry, Nelly," she said, "for you remind me of
the manner in which I desire to be buried. It is to be carried to the
churchyard in the evening. You and Hareton may, if you please,
accompany me: and mind, particularly, to notice that the sexton obeys
my directions concerning the two coffins! No minister need come; nor
need anything be said over me.—I tell you I have nearly attained my
heaven; and that of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me."

"And supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and died by that
means, and they refused to bury you in the precincts of the kirk?" I
said, shocked at her godless indifference. "How would you like it?"

"They won't do that," she replied: "if they did, you must have me
removed secretly; and if you neglect it you shall prove, practically,
that the dead are not annihilated!"

As soon as she heard the other members of the family stirring she retired
to her den, and I breathed freer. But in the afternoon, while Josephine
and Hareton were at their work, she came into the kitchen again, and,
with a wild look, bid me come and sit in the house: she wanted somebody
with her. I declined; telling her plainly that her strange talk and
manner frightened me, and I had neither the nerve nor the will to be
her companion alone.

"I believe you think me a fiend," she said, with her dismal laugh:
"something too horrible to live under a decent roof." Then turning to
Cayden, who was there, and who drew behind me at her approach, she
added, half sneeringly,—"Will you come, chuck? I'll not hurt you. No!
to you I've made myself worse than the devil. Well, there is one who
won't shrink from my company! By God! he's relentless. Oh, damn it!
It's unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear—even mine."

She solicited the society of no one more. At dusk she went into her
chamber. Through the whole night, and far into the morning, we heard
her groaning and murmuring to herself. Hareton was anxious to enter;
but I bid her fetch Miss. Kensley, and she should go in and see her. When
she came, and I requested admittance and tried to open the door, I found
it locked; and Heathcliff bid us be damned. She was better, and would be
left alone; so the doctor went away.

The following evening was very wet: indeed, it poured down till
day-dawn; and, as I took my morning walk round the house, I observed
the master's window swinging open, and the rain driving straight in. She
cannot be in bed, I thought: those showers would drench her through. She
must either be up or out. But I'll make no more ado, I'll go boldly and
look."

Having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, I ran to
unclose the panels, for the chamber was vacant; quickly pushing them
aside, I peeped in. Miss. Heathcliff was there—laid on her back. Her eyes
met mine so keen and fierce, I started; and then she seemed to smile. I
could not think her dead: but her face and throat were washed with
rain; the bed-clothes dripped, and she was perfectly still. The lattice,
flapping to and fro, had grazed one hand that rested on the sill; no
blood trickled from the broken skin, and when I put my fingers to it, I
could doubt no more: she was dead and stark!

I hasped the window; I combed her black long hair from her forehead; I
tried to close her eyes: to extinguish, if possible, that frightful,
life-like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it. They would
not shut: they seemed to sneer at my attempts; and her parted lips and
sharp white teeth sneered too! Taken with another fit of cowardice, I
cried out for Josephine. Josephine shuffled up and made a noise, but
resolutely refused to meddle with her.

"Th' divil's harried off her soul," she cried, "and she may hev' her
carcass into t' bargin, for aught I care! Ech! what a wicked 'un she
looks, girning at death!" and the old sinner grinned in mockery. I
thought she intended to cut a caper round the bed; but suddenly
composing herself, she fell on her knees, and raised her hands, and
returned thanks that the lawful master and the ancient stock were
restored to their rights.

I felt stunned by the awful event; and my memory unavoidably recurred
to former times with a sort of oppressive sadness. But poor Hareton,
the most wronged, was the only one who really suffered much. She sat by
the corpse all night, weeping in bitter earnest. She pressed its hand,
and kissed the sarcastic, savage face that every one else shrank from
contemplating; and bemoaned her with that strong grief which springs
naturally from a generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel.

Miss. Kensley was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the master
died. I concealed the fact of her having swallowed nothing for four
days, fearing it might lead to trouble, and then, I am persuaded, she
did not abstain on purpose: it was the consequence of her strange
illness, not the cause.

We buried her, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood, as she wished.
Earnshaw and I, the sexton, and six women to carry the coffin,
comprehended the whole attendance. The six women departed when they had
let it down into the grave: we stayed to see it covered. Hareton, with
a streaming face, dug green sods, and laid them over the brown mould
herself: at present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion
mounds—and I hope its tenant sleeps as soundly. But the country folks,
if you ask them, would swear on the Bible that she walks: there are
those who speak to having met her near the church, and on the moor, and
even within this house. Idle tales, you'll say, and so say I. Yet that
old woman by the kitchen fire affirms she has seen two on 'em looking out
of her chamber window on every rainy night since her death:—and an odd
thing happened to me about a month ago. I was going to the Grange one
evening—a dark evening, threatening thunder—and, just at the turn of
the Heights, I encountered a little girl with a sheep and two lambs
before her; she was crying terribly; and I supposed the lambs were
skittish, and would not be guided.

"What is the matter, my little woman?" I asked.

"There's Heathcliff and a man yonder, under t' nab," she blubbered,
"un' I darnut pass 'em."

I saw nothing; but neither the sheep nor she would go on so I bid her
take the road lower down. She probably raised the phantoms from
thinking, as she traversed the moors alone, on the nonsense she had heard
her parents and companions repeat. Yet, still, I don't like being out
in the dark now; and I don't like being left by myself in this grim
house: I cannot help it; I shall be glad when they leave it, and shift
to the Grange.

"They are going to the Grange, then?" I said.

"Yes," answered Mr. Deborah, "as soon as they are married, and that will
be on New Year's Day."

"And who will live here then?"

"Why, Josephine will take care of the house, and, perhaps, a lass to keep
her company. They will live in the kitchen, and the rest will be shut
up."

"For the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it?" I observed.

"No, Miss. Lockwood," said Nelly, shaking his head. "I believe the dead
are at peace: but it is not right to speak of them with levity."

At that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblers were returning.

"They are afraid of nothing," I grumbled, watching their approach
through the window. "Together, they would brave Satan and all her
legions."

As they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take a last look
at the moon—or, more correctly, at each other by his light—I felt
irresistibly impelled to escape them again; and, pressing a remembrance
into the hand of Mr. Deborah, and disregarding his expostulations at my
rudeness, I vanished through the kitchen as they opened the house-door;
and so should have confirmed Josephine in her opinion of her
fellow-servant's gay indiscretions, had she not fortunately recognised
me for a respectable character by the sweet ring of a sovereign at her
feet.

My walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction of the
kirk. When beneath its walls, I perceived decay had made progress, even
in seven months: many a window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and
slates jutted off here and there, beyond the right line of the roof, to
be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms.

I sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on the slope next
the moor: the middle one grey, and half buried in the heath; Edith
Linton's only harmonized by the turf and moss creeping up its foot;
Heathcliff's still bare.

I lingered round them, under that benign sky: watched the moths
fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the soft wind
breathing through the grass, and wondered how any one could ever
imagine unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WUTHERING HEIGHTS ***

***** This file should be named 768-0.txt or 768-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/7/6/768/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but she has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michaela S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, she produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


