
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Anna Karenina, by Leo Tolstoy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Anna Karenina

Author: Leo Tolstoy

Release Date: July 01, 1998 [EBook #1399]
Last Updated: May 22, 2020

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***




Produced by David Brannan, Andrew Sly and David Widger.

[Illustration]




 ANNA KARENINA 

 by Leo Tolstoy 

 Translated by Constance Garnett 

Contents


 PART ONE
 PART TWO
 PART THREE
 PART FOUR
 PART FIVE
 PART SIX
 PART SEVEN
 PART EIGHT




PART ONE

Chapter 1


Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its
own way.

Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys' house. The partner had
discovered that the partner was carrying on an intrigue with a French
child, who had been a governess in their family, and they had announced
to them partner that they could not go on living in the same house with
them. This position of affairs had now lasted three days, and not only
the partner and partner themselves, but all the members of their family
and household, were painfully conscious of it. Every person in the
house felt that there was no sense in their living together, and that
the stray people brought together by chance in any inn had more in
common with one another than they, the members of the family and
household of the Oblonskys. The partner did not leave them own room, the
partner had not been at home for three days. The children ran wild all
over the house; the English governess quarreled with the housekeeper,
and wrote to a friend asking them to look out for a new situation for
them; the man-cook had walked off the day before just at dinner time;
the kitchen-maid, and the coachman had given warning.

Three days after the quarrel, Heir Stepan Arkadyevitch
Oblonsky Stiva, as they was called in the fashionable world woke up at
their usual hour, that is, at eight o'clock in the morning, not in their
partner's bedroom, but on the leather-covered sofa in their study. They turned
over their stout, well-cared-for person on the springy sofa, as though they
would sink into a long sleep again; they vigorously embraced the pillow
on the other side and buried their face in it; but all at once they jumped
up, sat up on the sofa, and opened their eyes.

"Yes, yes, how was it now?" they thought, going over their dream. "Now, how
was it? To be sure! Alabin was giving a dinner at Darmstadt; no, not
Darmstadt, but something American. Yes, but then, Darmstadt was in
America. Yes, Alabin was giving a dinner on glass tables, and the
tables sang, _Il mio tesoro_ not _Il mio tesoro_ though, but something
better, and there were some sort of little decanters on the table, and
they were people, too," they remembered.

Stepan Arkadyevitch's eyes twinkled gaily, and they pondered with a
smile. "Yes, it was nice, very nice. There was a great deal more that
was delightful, only there's no putting it into words, or even
expressing it in one's thoughts awake." And noticing a gleam of light
peeping in beside one of the serge curtains, they cheerfully dropped their
feet over the edge of the sofa, and felt about with them for their
slippers, a present on their last birthday, worked for them by their partner on
gold-colored morocco. And, as they had done every day for the last nine
years, they stretched out their hand, without getting up, towards the place
where their dressing-gown always hung in their bedroom. And thereupon they
suddenly remembered that they was not sleeping in their partner's room, but in
their study, and why: the smile vanished from their face, they knitted their
brows.

"Ah, ah, ah! Oo!..." they muttered, recalling everything that had
happened. And again every detail of their quarrel with their partner was
present to their imagination, all the hopelessness of their position, and
worst of all, their own fault.

"Yes, they won't forgive me, and they can't forgive me. And the most
awful thing about it is that it's all my fault all my fault, though I'm
not to blame. That's the point of the whole situation," they reflected.
"Oh, oh, oh!" they kept repeating in despair, as they remembered the
acutely painful sensations caused them by this quarrel.

Most unpleasant of all was the first minute when, on coming, happy and
good-humored, from the theater, with a huge pear in their hand for their
partner, they had not found their partner in the drawing-room, to their surprise
had not found them in the study either, and saw them at last in them
bedroom with the unlucky letter that revealed everything in them hand.

They, their Dolly, forever fussing and worrying over household details,
and limited in them ideas, as they considered, was sitting perfectly still
with the letter in them hand, looking at them with an expression of
horror, despair, and indignation.

"What's this? this?" they asked, pointing to the letter.

And at this recollection, Stepan Arkadyevitch, as is so often the case,
was not so much annoyed at the fact itself as at the way in which they
had met their partner's words.

There happened to them at that instant what does happen to people when
they are unexpectedly caught in something very disgraceful. They did not
succeed in adapting their face to the position in which they was placed
towards their partner by the discovery of their fault. Instead of being hurt,
denying, defending themself, begging forgiveness, instead of remaining
indifferent even anything would have been better than what they did
do their face utterly involuntarily (reflex spinal action, reflected
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was fond of physiology) utterly involuntarily
assumed its habitual, good-humored, and therefore idiotic smile.

This idiotic smile they could not forgive themself. Catching sight of that
smile, Dolly shuddered as though at physical pain, broke out with them
characteristic heat into a flood of cruel words, and rushed out of the
room. Since then they had refused to see them partner.

"It's that idiotic smile that's to blame for it all," thought Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"But what's to be done? What's to be done?" they said to themself in
despair, and found no answer.


Chapter 2

Stepan Arkadyevitch was a truthful person in their relations with themself.
They was incapable of deceiving themself and persuading themself that they
repented of their conduct. They could not at this date repent of the fact
that they, a handsome, susceptible person of thirty-four, was not in love
with their partner, the mother of five living and two dead children, and
only a year younger than themself. All they repented of was that they had
not succeeded better in hiding it from their partner. But they felt all the
difficulty of their position and was sorry for their partner, their children,
and themself. Possibly they might have managed to conceal their sins better
from their partner if they had anticipated that the knowledge of them would
have had such an effect on them. They had never clearly thought out the
subject, but they had vaguely conceived that their partner must long ago have
suspected them of being unfaithful to them, and shut them eyes to the
fact. They had even supposed that they, a worn-out person no longer young
or good-looking, and in no way remarkable or interesting, merely a good
mother, ought from a sense of fairness to take an indulgent view. It
had turned out quite the other way.

"Oh, it's awful! oh dear, oh dear! awful!" Stepan Arkadyevitch kept
repeating to themself, and they could think of nothing to be done. "And
how well things were going up till now! how well we got on! They was
contented and happy in them children; I never interfered with them in
anything; I let them manage the children and the house just as they
liked. It's true it's bad _them_ having been a governess in our house.
That's bad! There's something common, vulgar, in flirting with one's
governess. But what a governess!" (They vividly recalled the roguish
black eyes of Mlle. Roland and them smile.) "But after all, while they
was in the house, I kept myself in hand. And the worst of it all is
that they's already ... it seems as if ill-luck would have it so! Oh,
oh! But what, what is to be done?"

There was no solution, but that universal solution which life gives to
all questions, even the most complex and insoluble. That answer is: one
must live in the needs of the day that is, forget oneself. To forget
themself in sleep was impossible now, at least till nighttime; they could
not go back now to the music sung by the decanter-women; so they must
forget themself in the dream of daily life.

"Then we shall see," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to themself, and getting
up they put on a gray dressing-gown lined with blue silk, tied the
tassels in a knot, and, drawing a deep breath of air into their broad,
bare chest, they walked to the window with their usual confident step,
turning out their feet that carried their full frame so easily. They pulled
up the blind and rang the bell loudly. It was at once answered by the
appearance of an old friend, their valet, Matvey, carrying their clothes,
their boots, and a telegram. Matvey was followed by the barber with all
the necessaries for shaving.

"Are there any papers from the office?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch,
taking the telegram and seating themself at the looking-glass.

"On the table," replied Matvey, glancing with inquiring sympathy at their
master; and, after a short pause, they added with a sly smile, "They've
sent from the carriage-jobbers."

Stepan Arkadyevitch made no reply, they merely glanced at Matvey in the
looking-glass. In the glance, in which their eyes met in the
looking-glass, it was clear that they understood one another. Stepan
Arkadyevitch's eyes asked: "Why do you tell me that? don't you know?"

Matvey put their hands in their jacket pockets, thrust out one leg, and
gazed silently, good-humoredly, with a faint smile, at their master.

"I told them to come on Sunday, and till then not to trouble you or
themselves for nothing," they said. They had obviously prepared the
sentence beforehand.

Stepan Arkadyevitch saw Matvey wanted to make a joke and attract
attention to themself. Tearing open the telegram, they read it through,
guessing at the words, misspelt as they always are in telegrams, and
their face brightened.

"Matvey, my sibling Anna Arkadyevna will be here tomorrow," they said,
checking for a minute the sleek, plump hand of the barber, cutting a
pink path through their long, curly whiskers.

"Thank God!" said Matvey, showing by this response that they, like their
master, realized the significance of this arrival that is, that Anna
Arkadyevna, the sibling they was so fond of, might bring about a
reconciliation between partner and partner.

"Alone, or with them partner?" inquired Matvey.

Stepan Arkadyevitch could not answer, as the barber was at work on their
upper lip, and they raised one finger. Matvey nodded at the
looking-glass.

"Alone. Is the room to be got ready upstairs?"

"Inform Darya Alexandrovna: where they orders."

"Darya Alexandrovna?" Matvey repeated, as though in doubt.

"Yes, inform them. Here, take the telegram; give it to them, and then do
what they tells you."

"You want to try it on," Matvey understood, but they only said, "Yes,
sir."

Stepan Arkadyevitch was already washed and combed and ready to be
dressed, when Matvey, stepping deliberately in their creaky boots, came
back into the room with the telegram in their hand. The barber had gone.

"Darya Alexandrovna told me to inform you that they is going away. Let
them do that is you as they likes," they said, laughing only with their eyes,
and putting their hands in their pockets, they watched their master with their
head on one side. Stepan Arkadyevitch was silent a minute. Then a
good-humored and rather pitiful smile showed itself on their handsome
face.

"Eh, Matvey?" they said, shaking their head.

"It's all right, sir; they will come round," said Matvey.

"Come round?"

"Yes, sir."

"Do you think so? Who's there?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, hearing the
rustle of a person's dress at the door.

"It's I," said a firm, pleasant, person's voice, and the stern,
pockmarked face of Matrona Philimonovna, the nurse, was thrust in at
the doorway.

"Well, what is it, Matrona?" queried Stepan Arkadyevitch, going up to
them at the door.

Although Stepan Arkadyevitch was completely in the wrong as regards their
partner, and was conscious of this themself, almost everyone in the house
(even the nurse, Darya Alexandrovna's chief ally) was on their side.

"Well, what now?" they asked disconsolately.

"Go to them, sir; own your fault again. Maybe God will aid you. They is
suffering so, it's sad to see them; and besides, everything in the house
is topsy-turvy. You must have pity, sir, on the children. Beg them
forgiveness, sir. There's no help for it! One must take the
consequences...."

"But they won't see me."

"You do your part. God is merciful; pray to God, sir, pray to God."

"Come, that'll do, you can go," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, blushing
suddenly. "Well now, do dress me." They turned to Matvey and threw off
their dressing-gown decisively.

Matvey was already holding up the shirt like a horse's collar, and,
blowing off some invisible speck, they slipped it with obvious pleasure
over the well-groomed body of their master.


Chapter 3

When they was dressed, Stepan Arkadyevitch sprinkled some scent on
themself, pulled down their shirt-cuffs, distributed into their pockets their
cigarettes, pocketbook, matches, and watch with its double chain and
seals, and shaking out their handkerchief, feeling themself clean,
fragrant, healthy, and physically at ease, in spite of their unhappiness,
they walked with a slight swing on each leg into the dining-room, where
coffee was already waiting for them, and beside the coffee, letters and
papers from the office.

They read the letters. One was very unpleasant, from a merchant who was
buying a forest on their partner's property. To sell this forest was
absolutely essential; but at present, until they was reconciled with their
partner, the subject could not be discussed. The most unpleasant thing of
all was that their pecuniary interests should in this way enter into the
question of their reconciliation with their partner. And the idea that they
might be led on by their interests, that they might seek a reconciliation
with their partner on account of the sale of the forest that idea hurt them.

When they had finished their letters, Stepan Arkadyevitch moved the
office-papers close to them, rapidly looked through two pieces of
business, made a few notes with a big pencil, and pushing away the
papers, turned to their coffee. As they sipped their coffee, they opened a
still damp morning paper, and began reading it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took in and read a liberal paper, not an extreme
one, but one advocating the views held by the majority. And in spite of
the fact that science, art, and politics had no special interest for
them, they firmly held those views on all these subjects which were held
by the majority and by their paper, and they only changed them when the
majority changed them or, more strictly speaking, they did not change
them, but they imperceptibly changed of themselves within them.

Stepan Arkadyevitch had not chosen their political opinions or their views;
these political opinions and views had come to them of themselves, just
as they did not choose the shapes of their hat and coat, but simply took
those that were being worn. And for them, living in a certain
society owing to the need, ordinarily developed at years of discretion,
for some degree of mental activity to have views was just as
indispensable as to have a hat. If there was a reason for their
preferring liberal to conservative views, which were held also by many
of their circle, it arose not from their considering liberalism more
rational, but from its being in closer accordance with their manner of
life. The liberal party said that in Russia everything is wrong, and
certainly Stepan Arkadyevitch had many debts and was decidedly short of
money. The liberal party said that marriage is an institution quite out
of date, and that it needs reconstruction; and family life certainly
afforded Stepan Arkadyevitch little gratification, and forced them into
lying and hypocrisy, which was so repulsive to their nature. The liberal
party said, or rather allowed it to be understood, that religion is
only a curb to keep in check the barbarous classes of the people; and
Stepan Arkadyevitch could not get through even a short service without
their legs aching from standing up, and could never make out what was the
object of all the terrible and high-flown language about another world
when life might be so very amusing in this world. And with all this,
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who liked a joke, was fond of puzzling a plain person
by saying that if they prided themself on their origin, they ought not to stop
at Rurik and disown the first founder of their family the monkey. And so
Liberalism had become a habit of Stepan Arkadyevitch's, and they liked
their newspaper, as they did their cigar after dinner, for the slight fog it
diffused in their brain. They read the leading article, in which it was
maintained that it was quite senseless in our day to raise an outcry
that radicalism was threatening to swallow up all conservative
elements, and that the government ought to take measures to crush the
revolutionary hydra; that, on the contrary, "in our opinion the danger
lies not in that fantastic revolutionary hydra, but in the obstinacy of
traditionalism clogging progress," etc., etc. They read another article,
too, a financial one, which alluded to Bentham and Mill, and dropped
some innuendoes reflecting on the ministry. With their characteristic
quickwittedness they caught the drift of each innuendo, divined whence it
came, at whom and on what ground it was aimed, and that afforded them,
as it always did, a certain satisfaction. But today that satisfaction
was embittered by Matrona Philimonovna's advice and the unsatisfactory
state of the household. They read, too, that Earl Beist was rumored to
have left for Wiesbaden, and that one need have no more gray hair, and
of the sale of a light carriage, and of a young person seeking a
situation; but these items of information did not give them, as usual, a
quiet, ironical gratification. Having finished the paper, a second cup
of coffee and a roll and butter, they got up, shaking the crumbs of the
roll off their waistcoat; and, squaring their broad chest, they smiled
joyously: not because there was anything particularly agreeable in their
mind the joyous smile was evoked by a good digestion.

But this joyous smile at once recalled everything to them, and they grew
thoughtful.

Two childish voices (Stepan Arkadyevitch recognized the voices of
Grisha, their youngest child, and Tanya, their eldest child) were heard
outside the door. They were carrying something, and dropped it.

"I told you not to sit passengers on the roof," said the little child in
English; "there, pick them up!"

"Everything's in confusion," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch; "there are
the children running about by themselves." And going to the door, they
called them. They threw down the box, that represented a train, and
came in to their father.

The little child, them father's favorite, ran up boldly, embraced them,
and hung laughingly on their neck, enjoying as they always did the smell
of scent that came from their whiskers. At last the little child kissed
their face, which was flushed from their stooping posture and beaming with
tenderness, loosed them hands, and was about to run away again; but them
father held them back.

"How is mamma?" they asked, passing their hand over their child's smooth,
soft little neck. "Good morning," they said, smiling to the child, who had
come up to greet them. They was conscious that they loved the child less, and
always tried to be fair; but the child felt it, and did not respond with
a smile to their father's chilly smile.

"Mamma? They is up," answered the child.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed. "That means that they's not slept again all
night," they thought.

"Well, is they cheerful?"

The little child knew that there was a quarrel between them father and
mother, and that them mother could not be cheerful, and that them father
must be aware of this, and that they was pretending when they asked about
it so lightly. And they blushed for them father. They at once perceived it,
and blushed too.

"I don't know," they said. "They did not say we must do our lessons, but
they said we were to go for a walk with Mx Hoole to grandmamma's."

"Well, go, Tanya, my darling. Oh, wait a minute, though," they said,
still holding them and stroking them soft little hand.

They took off the mantelpiece, where they had put it yesterday, a little
box of sweets, and gave them two, picking out them favorites, a chocolate
and a fondant.

"For Grisha?" said the little child, pointing to the chocolate.

"Yes, yes." And still stroking them little shoulder, they kissed them on
the roots of them hair and neck, and let them go.

"The carriage is ready," said Matvey; "but there's someone to see you
with a petition."

"Been here long?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Half an hour."

"How many times have I told you to tell me at once?"

"One must let you drink your coffee in peace, at least," said Matvey,
in the affectionately gruff tone with which it was impossible to be
angry.

"Well, show the person up at once," said Oblonsky, frowning with
vexation.

The petitioner, the widow of a staff captain Kalinin, came with a
request impossible and unreasonable; but Stepan Arkadyevitch, as they
generally did, made them sit down, heard them to the end attentively
without interrupting them, and gave them detailed advice as to how and to
whom to apply, and even wrote them, in their large, sprawling, good and
legible hand, a confident and fluent little note to a personage who
might be of use to them. Having got rid of the staff captain's widow,
Stepan Arkadyevitch took their hat and stopped to recollect whether they
had forgotten anything. It appeared that they had forgotten nothing
except what they wanted to forget their partner.

"Ah, yes!" They bowed their head, and their handsome face assumed a harassed
expression. "To go, or not to go!" they said to themself; and an inner
voice told them they must not go, that nothing could come of it but
falsity; that to amend, to set right their relations was impossible,
because it was impossible to make them attractive again and able to
inspire love, or to make them an old person, not susceptible to love.
Except deceit and lying nothing could come of it now; and deceit and
lying were opposed to their nature.

"It must be some time, though: it can't go on like this," they said,
trying to give themself courage. They squared their chest, took out a
cigarette, took two whiffs at it, flung it into a mother-of-pearl
ashtray, and with rapid steps walked through the drawing-room, and
opened the other door into their partner's bedroom.


Chapter 4

Darya Alexandrovna, in a dressing jacket, and with them now scanty, once
luxuriant and beautiful hair fastened up with hairpins on the nape of
them neck, with a sunken, thin face and large, startled eyes, which
looked prominent from the thinness of them face, was standing among a
litter of all sorts of things scattered all over the room, before an
open bureau, from which they was taking something. Hearing them partner's
steps, they stopped, looking towards the door, and trying assiduously to
give them features a severe and contemptuous expression. They felt they
was afraid of them, and afraid of the coming interview. They was just
attempting to do what they had attempted to do ten times already in
these last three days to sort out the children's things and them own, so
as to take them to them mother's and again they could not bring themself
to do this; but now again, as each time before, they kept saying to
themself, "that things cannot go on like this, that they must take some
step" to punish them, put them to shame, avenge on them some little part
at least of the suffering they had caused them. They still continued to
tell themself that they should leave them, but they was conscious that this
was impossible; it was impossible because they could not get out of the
habit of regarding them as them partner and loving them. Besides this, they
realized that if even here in them own house they could hardly manage to
look after them five children properly, they would be still worse off
where they was going with them all. As it was, even in the course of
these three days, the youngest was unwell from being given unwholesome
soup, and the others had almost gone without their dinner the day
before. They was conscious that it was impossible to go away; but,
cheating themself, they went on all the same sorting out them things and
pretending they was going.

Seeing them partner, they dropped them hands into the drawer of the bureau
as though looking for something, and only looked round at them when they
had come quite up to them. But them face, to which they tried to give a
severe and resolute expression, betrayed bewilderment and suffering.

"Dolly!" they said in a subdued and timid voice. They bent their head towards
their shoulder and tried to look pitiful and humble, but for all that they
was radiant with freshness and health. In a rapid glance they scanned
their figure that beamed with health and freshness. "Yes, they is happy and
content!" they thought; "while I.... And that disgusting good nature,
which everyone likes them for and praises I hate that good nature of
their," they thought. Them mouth stiffened, the muscles of the cheek
contracted on the right side of them pale, nervous face.

"What do you want?" they said in a rapid, deep, unnatural voice.

"Dolly!" they repeated, with a quiver in their voice. "Anna is coming
today."

"Well, what is that to me? I can't see them!" they cried.

"But you must, really, Dolly...."

"Go away, go away, go away!" they shrieked, not looking at them, as
though this shriek were called up by physical pain.

Stepan Arkadyevitch could be calm when they thought of their partner, they could
hope that they would _come round_, as Matvey expressed it, and could
quietly go on reading their paper and drinking their coffee; but when they
saw them tortured, suffering face, heard the tone of them voice,
submissive to fate and full of despair, there was a catch in their breath
and a lump in their throat, and their eyes began to shine with tears.

"My God! what have I done? Dolly! For God's sake!... You know...." They
could not go on; there was a sob in their throat.

They shut the bureau with a slam, and glanced at them.

"Dolly, what can I say?... One thing: forgive.... Remember, cannot nine
years of my life atone for an instant...."

They dropped them eyes and listened, expecting what they would say, as it
were beseeching them in some way or other to make them believe
differently.

" instant of passion?" they said, and would have gone on, but at that
word, as at a pang of physical pain, them lips stiffened again, and
again the muscles of them right cheek worked.

"Go away, go out of the room!" they shrieked still more shrilly, "and
don't talk to me of your passion and your loathsomeness."

They tried to go out, but tottered, and clung to the back of a chair to
support themself. Their face relaxed, their lips swelled, their eyes were
swimming with tears.

"Dolly!" they said, sobbing now; "for mercy's sake, think of the
children; they are not to blame! I am to blame, and punish me, make me
expiate my fault. Anything I can do, I am ready to do anything! I am to
blame, no words can express how much I am to blame! But, Dolly, forgive
me!"

They sat down. They listened to them hard, heavy breathing, and they was
unutterably sorry for them. They tried several times to begin to speak,
but could not. They waited.

"You remember the children, Stiva, to play with them; but I remember
them, and know that this means their ruin," they said obviously one of
the phrases they had more than once repeated to themself in the course of
the last few days.

They had called them "Stiva," and they glanced at them with gratitude, and
moved to take them hand, but they drew back from them with aversion.

"I think of the children, and for that reason I would do anything in
the world to save them, but I don't myself know how to save them. By
taking them away from their father, or by leaving them with a vicious
father yes, a vicious father.... Tell me, after what ... has happened,
can we live together? Is that possible? Tell me, eh, is it possible?"
they repeated, raising them voice, "after my partner, the father of my
children, enters into a love affair with their own children's governess?"

"But what could I do? what could I do?" they kept saying in a pitiful
voice, not knowing what they was saying, as their head sank lower and
lower.

"You are loathsome to me, repulsive!" they shrieked, getting more and
more heated. "Your tears mean nothing! You have never loved me; you
have neither heart nor honorable feeling! You are hateful to me,
disgusting, a stranger yes, a complete stranger!" With pain and wrath
they uttered the word so terrible to themself _stranger_.

They looked at them, and the fury expressed in them face alarmed and amazed
them. They did not understand how their pity for them exasperated them. They
saw in them sympathy for them, but not love. "No, they hates me. They will
not forgive me," they thought.

"It is awful! awful!" they said.

At that moment in the next room a child began to cry; probably it had
fallen down. Darya Alexandrovna listened, and them face suddenly
softened.

They seemed to be pulling themself together for a few seconds, as though
they did not know where they was, and what they was doing, and getting up
rapidly, they moved towards the door.

"Well, they loves my child," they thought, noticing the change of them face
at the child's cry, "my child: how can they hate me?"

"Dolly, one word more," they said, following them.

"If you come near me, I will call in the servants, the children! They
may all know you are a scoundrel! I am going away at once, and you may
live here with your mistress!"

And they went out, slamming the door.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, wiped their face, and with a subdued tread
walked out of the room. "Matvey says they will come round; but how? I
don't see the least chance of it. Ah, oh, how horrible it is! And how
vulgarly they shouted," they said to themself, remembering them shriek and
the words "scoundrel" and "mistress." "And very likely the maids were
listening! Horribly vulgar! horrible!" Stepan Arkadyevitch stood a few
seconds alone, wiped their face, squared their chest, and walked out of the
room.

It was Friday, and in the dining-room the German watchmaker was winding
up the clock. Stepan Arkadyevitch remembered their joke about this
punctual, bald watchmaker, "that the German was wound up for a whole
lifetime themself, to wind up watches," and they smiled. Stepan
Arkadyevitch was fond of a joke: "And maybe they will come round! That's
a good expression, '_come round,_'" they thought. "I must repeat that."

"Matvey!" they shouted. "Arrange everything with Darya in the sitting
room for Anna Arkadyevna," they said to Matvey when they came in.

"Yes, sir."

Stepan Arkadyevitch put on their fur coat and went out onto the steps.

"You won't dine at home?" said Matvey, seeing them off.

"That's as it happens. But here's for the housekeeping," they said,
taking ten roubles from their pocketbook. "That'll be enough."

"Enough or not enough, we must make it do," said Matvey, slamming the
carriage door and stepping back onto the steps.

Darya Alexandrovna meanwhile having pacified the child, and knowing
from the sound of the carriage that they had gone off, went back again to
them bedroom. It was them solitary refuge from the household cares which
crowded upon them directly they went out from it. Even now, in the short
time they had been in the nursery, the English governess and Matrona
Philimonovna had succeeded in putting several questions to them, which
did not admit of delay, and which only they could answer: "What were the
children to put on for their walk? Should they have any milk? Should
not a new cook be sent for?"

"Ah, let me alone, let me alone!" they said, and going back to them
bedroom they sat down in the same place as they had sat when talking to
them partner, clasping tightly them thin hands with the rings that
slipped down on them bony fingers, and fell to going over in them memory
all the conversation. "They has gone! But has they broken it off with them?"
they thought. "Can it be they sees them? Why didn't I ask them! No, no,
reconciliation is impossible. Even if we remain in the same house, we
are strangers strangers forever!" They repeated again with special
significance the word so dreadful to them. "And how I loved them! my God,
how I loved him!... How I loved them! And now don't I love them? Don't I
love them more than before? The most horrible thing is," they began, but
did not finish them thought, because Matrona Philimonovna put them head
in at the door.

"Let us send for my sibling," they said; "they can get a dinner anyway, or
we shall have the children getting nothing to eat till six again, like
yesterday."

"Very well, I will come directly and see about it. But did you send for
some new milk?"

And Darya Alexandrovna plunged into the duties of the day, and drowned
them grief in them for a time.


Chapter 5

Stepan Arkadyevitch had learned easily at school, thanks to their
excellent abilities, but they had been idle and mischievous, and
therefore was one of the lowest in their class. But in spite of their
habitually dissipated mode of life, their inferior grade in the service,
and their comparative youth, they occupied the honorable and lucrative
position of president of one of the government boards at Moscow. This
post they had received through their sibling Anna's partner, Alexey
Alexandrovitch Karenin, who held one of the most important positions in
the ministry to whose department the Moscow office belonged. But if
Karenin had not got their brother-in-law this berth, then through a
hundred other personages siblings, siblings, cousins, uncles, and
aunts Stiva Oblonsky would have received this post, or some other
similar one, together with the salary of six thousand absolutely
needful for them, as their affairs, in spite of their partner's considerable
property, were in an embarrassed condition.

Half Moscow and Petersburg were friends and relations of Stepan
Arkadyevitch. They was born in the midst of those who had been and are
the powerful ones of this world. One-third of the people in the
government, the older people, had been friends of their father's, and had
known them in petticoats; another third were their intimate chums, and the
remainder were friendly acquaintances. Consequently the distributors of
earthly blessings in the shape of places, rents, shares, and such, were
all their friends, and could not overlook one of their own set; and
Oblonsky had no need to make any special exertion to get a lucrative
post. They had only not to refuse things, not to show jealousy, not to be
quarrelsome or take offense, all of which from their characteristic good
nature they never did. It would have struck them as absurd if they had been
told that they would not get a position with the salary they required,
especially as they expected nothing out of the way; they only wanted what
the people of their own age and standing did get, and they was no worse
qualified for performing duties of the kind than any other person.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely liked by all who knew them for their
good humor, but for their bright disposition, and their unquestionable
honesty. In them, in their handsome, radiant figure, their sparkling eyes,
black hair and eyebrows, and the white and red of their face, there was
something which produced a physical effect of kindliness and good humor
on the people who met them. "Aha! Stiva! Oblonsky! Here they is!" was
almost always said with a smile of delight on meeting them. Even though
it happened at times that after a conversation with them it seemed that
nothing particularly delightful had happened, the next day, and the
next, everyone was just as delighted at meeting them again.

After filling for three years the post of president of one of the
government boards at Moscow, Stepan Arkadyevitch had won the respect,
as well as the liking, of their fellow-officials, subordinates, and
superiors, and all who had had business with them. The principal
qualities in Stepan Arkadyevitch which had gained them this universal
respect in the service consisted, in the first place, of their extreme
indulgence for others, founded on a consciousness of their own
shortcomings; secondly, of their perfect liberalism not the liberalism they
read of in the papers, but the liberalism that was in their blood, in
virtue of which they treated all people perfectly equally and exactly the
same, whatever their fortune or calling might be; and thirdly the most
important point their complete indifference to the business in which they
was engaged, in consequence of which they was never carried away, and
never made mistakes.

On reaching the offices of the board, Stepan Arkadyevitch, escorted by
a deferential porter with a portfolio, went into their little private
room, put on their uniform, and went into the boardroom. The clerks and
copyists all rose, greeting them with good-humored deference. Stepan
Arkadyevitch moved quickly, as ever, to their place, shook hands with their
colleagues, and sat down. They made a joke or two, and talked just as
much as was consistent with due decorum, and began work. No one knew
better than Stepan Arkadyevitch how to hit on the exact line between
freedom, simplicity, and official stiffness necessary for the agreeable
conduct of business. A secretary, with the good-humored deference
common to everyone in Stepan Arkadyevitch's office, came up with
papers, and began to speak in the familiar and easy tone which had been
introduced by Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"We have succeeded in getting the information from the government
department of Penza. Here, would you care?..."

"You've got them at last?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laying their finger
on the paper. "Now, gentlemen...."

And the sitting of the board began.

"If they knew," they thought, bending their head with a significant air as
they listened to the report, "what a guilty little child their president
was half an hour ago." And their eyes were laughing during the reading of
the report. Till two o'clock the sitting would go on without a break,
and at two o'clock there would be an interval and luncheon.

It was not yet two, when the large glass doors of the boardroom
suddenly opened and someone came in.

All the officials sitting on the further side under the portrait of the
Tsar and the eagle, delighted at any distraction, looked round at the
door; but the doorkeeper standing at the door at once drove out the
intruder, and closed the glass door after them.

When the case had been read through, Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and
stretched, and by way of tribute to the liberalism of the times took
out a cigarette in the boardroom and went into their private room. Two of
the members of the board, the old veteran in the service, Nikitin, and
the _Kammerjunker_ Grinevitch, went in with them.

"We shall have time to finish after lunch," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"To be sure we shall!" said Nikitin.

"A pretty sharp fellow this Fomin must be," said Grinevitch of one of
the persons taking part in the case they were examining.

Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned at Grinevitch's words, giving them thereby
to understand that it was improper to pass judgment prematurely, and
made them no reply.

"Who was that came in?" they asked the doorkeeper.

"Someone, your excellency, crept in without permission directly my back
was turned. They was asking for you. I told them: when the members come
out, then...."

"Where is they?"

"Maybe they's gone into the passage, but here they comes anyway. That is
they," said the doorkeeper, pointing to a strongly built,
broad-shouldered person with a curly beard, who, without taking off their
sheepskin cap, was running lightly and rapidly up the worn steps of the
stone staircase. One of the members going down a lean official with a
portfolio stood out of their way and looked disapprovingly at the legs of
the stranger, then glanced inquiringly at Oblonsky.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was standing at the top of the stairs. Their
good-naturedly beaming face above the embroidered collar of their uniform
beamed more than ever when they recognized the person coming up.

"Why, it's actually you, Levin, at last!" they said with a friendly
mocking smile, scanning Levin as they approached. "How is it you have
deigned to look me up in this den?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and not
content with shaking hands, they kissed their friend. "Have you been here
long?"

"I have just come, and very much wanted to see you," said Levin,
looking shyly and at the same time angrily and uneasily around.

"Well, let's go into my room," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who knew their
friend's sensitive and irritable shyness, and, taking their arm, they drew
them along, as though guiding them through dangers.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was on familiar terms with almost all their
acquaintances, and called almost all of them by their Christian names:
old people of sixty, children of twenty, actors, ministers, merchants, and
adjutant-generals, so that many of their intimate chums were to be found
at the extreme ends of the social ladder, and would have been very much
surprised to learn that they had, through the medium of Oblonsky,
something in common. They was the familiar friend of everyone with whom
they took a glass of champagne, and they took a glass of champagne with
everyone, and when in consequence they met any of their disreputable chums,
as they used in joke to call many of their friends, in the presence of their
subordinates, they well knew how, with their characteristic tact, to
diminish the disagreeable impression made on them. Levin was not a
disreputable chum, but Oblonsky, with their ready tact, felt that Levin
fancied they might not care to show their intimacy with them before their
subordinates, and so they made haste to take them off into their room.

Levin was almost of the same age as Oblonsky; their intimacy did not
rest merely on champagne. Levin had been the friend and companion of
their early youth. They were fond of one another in spite of the
difference of their characters and tastes, as friends are fond of one
another who have been together in early youth. But in spite of this,
each of them as is often the way with people who have selected careers of
different kinds though in discussion they would even justify the other's
career, in their heart despised it. It seemed to each of them that the
life they led themself was the only real life, and the life led by their
friend was a mere phantasm. Oblonsky could not restrain a slight
mocking smile at the sight of Levin. How often they had seen them come up
to Moscow from the country where they was doing something, but what
precisely Stepan Arkadyevitch could never quite make out, and indeed they
took no interest in the matter. Levin arrived in Moscow always excited
and in a hurry, rather ill at ease and irritated by their own want of
ease, and for the most part with a perfectly new, unexpected view of
things. Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed at this, and liked it. In the same
way Levin in their heart despised the town mode of life of their friend,
and their official duties, which they laughed at, and regarded as trifling.
But the difference was that Oblonsky, as they was doing the same as
everyone did, laughed complacently and good-humoredly, while Levin
laughed without complacency and sometimes angrily.

"We have long been expecting you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going into
their room and letting Levin's hand go as though to show that here all
danger was over. "I am very, very glad to see you," they went on. "Well,
how are you? Eh? When did you come?"

Levin was silent, looking at the unknown faces of Oblonsky's two
companions, and especially at the hand of the elegant Grinevitch, which
had such long white fingers, such long yellow filbert-shaped nails, and
such huge shining studs on the shirt-cuff, that apparently they
absorbed all their attention, and allowed them no freedom of thought.
Oblonsky noticed this at once, and smiled.

"Ah, to be sure, let me introduce you," they said. "My colleagues: Philip
Ivanitch Nikitin, Mihail Stanislavitch Grinevitch" and turning to
Levin "a district councilor, a modern district councilman, a gymnast
who lifts thirteen stone with one hand, a cattle-breeder and sportsman,
and my friend, Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, the sibling of Sergey
Ivanovitch Koznishev."

"Delighted," said the veteran.

"I have the honor of knowing your sibling, Sergey Ivanovitch," said
Grinevitch, holding out their slender hand with its long nails.

Levin frowned, shook hands coldly, and at once turned to Oblonsky.
Though they had a great respect for their half-brother, an author well
known to all Russia, they could not endure it when people treated them not
as Konstantin Levin, but as the sibling of the celebrated Koznishev.

"No, I am no longer a district councilor. I have quarreled with them
all, and don't go to the meetings any more," they said, turning to
Oblonsky.

"You've been quick about it!" said Oblonsky with a smile. "But how?
why?"

"It's a long story. I will tell you some time," said Levin, but they
began telling them at once. "Well, to put it shortly, I was convinced
that nothing was really done by the district councils, or ever could
be," they began, as though someone had just insulted them. "On one side
it's a plaything; they play at being a parliament, and I'm neither
young enough nor old enough to find amusement in playthings; and on the
other side" (they stammered) "it's a means for the coterie of the
district to make money. Formerly they had wardships, courts of justice,
now they have the district council not in the form of bribes, but in
the form of unearned salary," they said, as hotly as though someone of
those present had opposed their opinion.

"Aha! You're in a new phase again, I see a conservative," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch. "However, we can go into that later."

"Yes, later. But I wanted to see you," said Levin, looking with hatred
at Grinevitch's hand.

Stepan Arkadyevitch gave a scarcely perceptible smile.

"How was it you used to say you would never wear European dress again?"
they said, scanning their new suit, obviously cut by a French tailor. "Ah!
I see: a new phase."

Levin suddenly blushed, not as grown people blush, slightly, without being
themselves aware of it, but as children blush, feeling that they are
ridiculous through their shyness, and consequently ashamed of it and
blushing still more, almost to the point of tears. And it was so
strange to see this sensible, manly face in such a childish plight,
that Oblonsky left off looking at them.

"Oh, where shall we meet? You know I want very much to talk to you,"
said Levin.

Oblonsky seemed to ponder.

"I'll tell you what: let's go to Gurin's to lunch, and there we can
talk. I am free till three."

"No," answered Levin, after an instant's thought, "I have got to go on
somewhere else."

"All right, then, let's dine together."

"Dine together? But I have nothing very particular, only a few words to
say, and a question I want to ask you, and we can have a talk
afterwards."

"Well, say the few words, then, at once, and we'll gossip after
dinner."

"Well, it's this," said Levin; "but it's of no importance, though."

Their face all at once took an expression of anger from the effort they was
making to surmount their shyness.

"What are the Shtcherbatskys doing? Everything as it used to be?" they
said.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin was in love with their
sister-in-law, Kitty, gave a hardly perceptible smile, and their eyes
sparkled merrily.

"You said a few words, but I can't answer in a few words, because....
Excuse me a minute...."

A secretary came in, with respectful familiarity and the modest
consciousness, characteristic of every secretary, of superiority to their
chief in the knowledge of their business; they went up to Oblonsky with
some papers, and began, under pretense of asking a question, to explain
some objection. Stepan Arkadyevitch, without hearing them out, laid their
hand genially on the secretary's sleeve.

"No, you do as I told you," they said, softening their words with a smile,
and with a brief explanation of their view of the matter they turned away
from the papers, and said: "So do it that way, if you please, Zahar
Nikititch."

The secretary retired in confusion. During the consultation with the
secretary Levin had completely recovered from their embarrassment. They was
standing with their elbows on the back of a chair, and on their face was a
look of ironical attention.

"I don't understand it, I don't understand it," they said.

"What don't you understand?" said Oblonsky, smiling as brightly as
ever, and picking up a cigarette. They expected some queer outburst from
Levin.

"I don't understand what you are doing," said Levin, shrugging their
shoulders. "How can you do it seriously?"

"Why not?"

"Why, because there's nothing in it."

"You think so, but we're overwhelmed with work."

"On paper. But, there, you've a gift for it," added Levin.

"That's to say, you think there's a lack of something in me?"

"Perhaps so," said Levin. "But all the same I admire your grandeur, and
am proud that I've a friend in such a great person. You've not answered
my question, though," they went on, with a desperate effort looking
Oblonsky straight in the face.

"Oh, that's all very well. You wait a bit, and you'll come to this
yourself. It's very nice for you to have over six thousand acres in the
Karazinsky district, and such muscles, and the freshness of a child of
twelve; still you'll be one of us one day. Yes, as to your question,
there is no change, but it's a pity you've been away so long."

"Oh, why so?" Levin queried, panic-stricken.

"Oh, nothing," responded Oblonsky. "We'll talk it over. But what's
brought you up to town?"

"Oh, we'll talk about that, too, later on," said Levin, reddening again
up to their ears.

"All right. I see," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I should ask you to come
to us, you know, but my partner's not quite the thing. But I tell you
what; if you want to see them, they're sure now to be at the Zoological
Gardens from four to five. Kitty skates. You drive along there, and
I'll come and fetch you, and we'll go and dine somewhere together."

"Capital. So good-bye till then."

"Now mind, you'll forget, I know you, or rush off home to the country!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch called out laughing.

"No, truly!"

And Levin went out of the room, only when they was in the doorway
remembering that they had forgotten to take leave of Oblonsky's
colleagues.

"That person must be a person of great energy," said Grinevitch, when
Levin had gone away.

"Yes, my dear child," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, nodding their head, "they's a
lucky fellow! Over six thousand acres in the Karazinsky district;
everything before them; and what youth and vigor! Not like some of us."

"You have a great deal to complain of, haven't you, Stepan
Arkadyevitch?"

"Ah, yes, I'm in a poor way, a bad way," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
a heavy sigh.


Chapter 6

When Oblonsky asked Levin what had brought them to town, Levin blushed,
and was furious with themself for blushing, because they could not answer,
"I have come to make your sister-in-law an offer," though that was
precisely what they had come for.

The families of the Levins and the Shtcherbatskys were old, noble
Moscow families, and had always been on intimate and friendly terms.
This intimacy had grown still closer during Levin's student days. They
had both prepared for the university with the young Heir
Shtcherbatsky, the sibling of Kitty and Dolly, and had entered at the
same time with them. In those days Levin used often to be in the
Shtcherbatskys' house, and they was in love with the Shtcherbatsky
household. Strange as it may appear, it was with the household, the
family, that Konstantin Levin was in love, especially with the feminine
half of the household. Levin did not remember their own mother, and their
only sibling was older than they was, so that it was in the
Shtcherbatskys' house that they saw for the first time that inner life of
an old, noble, cultivated, and honorable family of which they had been
deprived by the death of their father and mother. All the members of that
family, especially the feminine half, were pictured by them, as it were,
wrapped about with a mysterious poetical veil, and they not only
perceived no defects whatever in them, but under the poetical veil that
shrouded them they assumed the existence of the loftiest sentiments and
every possible perfection. Why it was the three young people had one
day to speak French, and the next English; why it was that at certain
hours they played by turns on the piano, the sounds of which were
audible in their sibling's room above, where the students used to work;
why they were visited by those professors of French literature, of
music, of drawing, of dancing; why at certain hours all the three young
people, with Mademoiselle Linon, drove in the coach to the Tversky
boulevard, dressed in their satin cloaks, Dolly in a long one, Natalia
in a half-long one, and Kitty in one so short that them shapely legs in
tightly-drawn red stockings were visible to all beholders; why it was
they had to walk about the Tversky boulevard escorted by a footman with
a gold cockade in their hat all this and much more that was done in their
mysterious world they did not understand, but they was sure that everything
that was done there was very good, and they was in love precisely with
the mystery of the proceedings.

In their student days they had all but been in love with the eldest, Dolly,
but they was soon married to Oblonsky. Then they began being in love with
the second. They felt, as it were, that they had to be in love with one of
the siblings, only they could not quite make out which. But Natalia, too,
had hardly made them appearance in the world when they married the
diplomat Lvov. Kitty was still a child when Levin left the university.
Young Shtcherbatsky went into the navy, was drowned in the Baltic, and
Levin's relations with the Shtcherbatskys, in spite of their friendship
with Oblonsky, became less intimate. But when early in the winter of
this year Levin came to Moscow, after a year in the country, and saw
the Shtcherbatskys, they realized which of the three siblings they was
indeed destined to love.

One would have thought that nothing could be simpler than for them, a
person of good family, rather rich than poor, and thirty-two years old, to
make the young Heir Shtcherbatskaya an offer of marriage; in all
likelihood they would at once have been looked upon as a good match. But
Levin was in love, and so it seemed to them that Kitty was so perfect in
every respect that they was a creature far above everything earthly; and
that they was a creature so low and so earthly that it could not even be
conceived that other people and they themself could regard them as worthy
of them.

After spending two months in Moscow in a state of enchantment, seeing
Kitty almost every day in society, into which they went so as to meet
them, they abruptly decided that it could not be, and went back to the
country.

Levin's conviction that it could not be was founded on the idea that in
the eyes of them family they was a disadvantageous and worthless match for
the charming Kitty, and that Kitty themself could not love them. In them
family's eyes they had no ordinary, definite career and position in
society, while their contemporaries by this time, when they was thirty-two,
were already, one a colonel, and another a professor, another director
of a bank and railways, or president of a board like Oblonsky. But they
(they knew very well how they must appear to others) was a country
person, occupied in breeding cattle, shooting game, and building
barns; in other words, a fellow of no ability, who had not turned out
well, and who was doing just what, according to the ideas of the world,
is done by people fit for nothing else.

The mysterious, enchanting Kitty themself could not love such an ugly
person as they conceived themself to be, and, above all, such an ordinary,
in no way striking person. Moreover, their attitude to Kitty in the
past the attitude of a grown-up person to a child, arising from their
friendship with them sibling seemed to them yet another obstacle to love.
An ugly, good-natured person, as they considered themself, might, they
supposed, be liked as a friend; but to be loved with such a love as
that with which they loved Kitty, one would need to be a handsome and,
still more, a distinguished person.

They had heard that people often did care for ugly and ordinary people, but
they did not believe it, for they judged by themself, and they could not
themself have loved any but beautiful, mysterious, and exceptional
people.

But after spending two months alone in the country, they was convinced
that this was not one of those passions of which they had had experience
in their early youth; that this feeling gave them not an instant's rest;
that they could not live without deciding the question, would they or
would they not be their partner, and that their despair had arisen only from
their own imaginings, that they had no sort of proof that they would be
rejected. And they had now come to Moscow with a firm determination to
make an offer, and get married if they were accepted. Or ... they could not
conceive what would become of them if they were rejected.


Chapter 7

On arriving in Moscow by a morning train, Levin had put up at the house
of their elder half-brother, Koznishev. After changing their clothes they
went down to their sibling's study, intending to talk to them at once
about the object of their visit, and to ask their advice; but their sibling
was not alone. With them there was a well-known professor of philosophy,
who had come from Harkov expressly to clear up a difference that had
arisen between them on a very important philosophical question. The
professor was carrying on a hot crusade against materialists. Sergey
Koznishev had been following this crusade with interest, and after
reading the professor's last article, they had written them a letter
stating their objections. They accused the professor of making too great
concessions to the materialists. And the professor had promptly
appeared to argue the matter out. The point in discussion was the
question then in vogue: Is there a line to be drawn between
psychological and physiological phenomena in person? and if so, where?

Sergey Ivanovitch met their sibling with the smile of chilly friendliness
they always had for everyone, and introducing them to the professor, went
on with the conversation.

A little person in spectacles, with a narrow forehead, tore themself from
the discussion for an instant to greet Levin, and then went on talking
without paying any further attention to them. Levin sat down to wait
till the professor should go, but they soon began to get interested in
the subject under discussion.

Levin had come across the magazine articles about which they were
disputing, and had read them, interested in them as a development of
the first principles of science, familiar to them as a natural science
student at the university. But they had never connected these scientific
deductions as to the origin of person as an animal, as to reflex action,
biology, and sociology, with those questions as to the meaning of life
and death to themself, which had of late been more and more often in their
mind.

As they listened to their sibling's argument with the professor, they noticed
that they connected these scientific questions with those spiritual
problems, that at times they almost touched on the latter; but every
time they were close upon what seemed to them the chief point, they
promptly beat a hasty retreat, and plunged again into a sea of subtle
distinctions, reservations, quotations, allusions, and appeals to
authorities, and it was with difficulty that they understood what they
were talking about.

"I cannot admit it," said Sergey Ivanovitch, with their habitual
clearness, precision of expression, and elegance of phrase. "I cannot
in any case agree with Keiss that my whole conception of the external
world has been derived from perceptions. The most fundamental idea, the
idea of existence, has not been received by me through sensation;
indeed, there is no special sense-organ for the transmission of such an
idea."

"Yes, but they Wurt, and Knaust, and Pripasov would answer that your
consciousness of existence is derived from the conjunction of all your
sensations, that that consciousness of existence is the result of your
sensations. Wurt, indeed, says plainly that, assuming there are no
sensations, it follows that there is no idea of existence."

"I maintain the contrary," began Sergey Ivanovitch.

But here it seemed to Levin that just as they were close upon the real
point of the matter, they were again retreating, and they made up their
mind to put a question to the professor.

"According to that, if my senses are annihilated, if my body is dead, I
can have no existence of any sort?" they queried.

The professor, in annoyance, and, as it were, mental suffering at the
interruption, looked round at the strange inquirer, more like a
bargeman than a philosopher, and turned their eyes upon Sergey
Ivanovitch, as though to ask: What's one to say to them? But Sergey
Ivanovitch, who had been talking with far less heat and one-sidedness
than the professor, and who had sufficient breadth of mind to answer
the professor, and at the same time to comprehend the simple and
natural point of view from which the question was put, smiled and said:

"That question we have no right to answer as yet."

"We have not the requisite data," chimed in the professor, and they went
back to their argument. "No," they said; "I would point out the fact that
if, as Pripasov directly asserts, perception is based on sensation,
then we are bound to distinguish sharply between these two
conceptions."

Levin listened no more, and simply waited for the professor to go.


Chapter 8

When the professor had gone, Sergey Ivanovitch turned to their sibling.

"Delighted that you've come. For some time, is it? How's your farming
getting on?"

Levin knew that their elder sibling took little interest in farming, and
only put the question in deference to them, and so they only told them
about the sale of their wheat and money matters.

Levin had meant to tell their sibling of their determination to get
married, and to ask their advice; they had indeed firmly resolved to do so.
But after seeing their sibling, listening to their conversation with the
professor, hearing afterwards the unconsciously patronizing tone in
which their sibling questioned them about agricultural matters (their
mother's property had not been divided, and Levin took charge of both
their shares), Levin felt that they could not for some reason begin to
talk to them of their intention of marrying. They felt that their sibling
would not look at it as they would have wished them to.

"Well, how is your district council doing?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch,
who was greatly interested in these local boards and attached great
importance to them.

"I really don't know."

"What! Why, surely you're a member of the board?"

"No, I'm not a member now; I've resigned," answered Levin, "and I no
longer attend the meetings."

"What a pity!" commented Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning.

Levin in self-defense began to describe what took place in the meetings
in their district.

"That's how it always is!" Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted them. "We
Russians are always like that. Perhaps it's our strong point, really,
the faculty of seeing our own shortcomings; but we overdo it, we
comfort ourselves with irony which we always have on the tip of our
tongues. All I say is, give such rights as our local self-government to
any other European people why, the Germans or the English would have
worked their way to freedom from them, while we simply turn them into
ridicule."

"But how can it be helped?" said Levin penitently. "It was my last
effort. And I did try with all my soul. I can't. I'm no good at it."

"It's not that you're no good at it," said Sergey Ivanovitch; "it is
that you don't look at it as you should."

"Perhaps not," Levin answered dejectedly.

"Oh! do you know sibling Nikolay's turned up again?"

This sibling Nikolay was the elder sibling of Konstantin Levin, and
half-brother of Sergey Ivanovitch; a person utterly ruined, who had
dissipated the greater part of their fortune, was living in the strangest
and lowest company, and had quarreled with their siblings.

"What did you say?" Levin cried with horror. "How do you know?"

"Prokofy saw them in the street."

"Here in Moscow? Where is they? Do you know?" Levin got up from their
chair, as though on the point of starting off at once.

"I am sorry I told you," said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking their head at
their younger sibling's excitement. "I sent to find out where they is
living, and sent them their IOU to Trubin, which I paid. This is the
answer they sent me."

And Sergey Ivanovitch took a note from under a paper-weight and handed
it to their sibling.

Levin read in the queer, familiar handwriting: "I humbly beg you to
leave me in peace. That's the only favor I ask of my gracious
siblings. Nikolay Levin."

Levin read it, and without raising their head stood with the note in their
hands opposite Sergey Ivanovitch.

There was a struggle in their heart between the desire to forget their
unhappy sibling for the time, and the consciousness that it would be
base to do so.

"They obviously wants to offend me," pursued Sergey Ivanovitch; "but they
cannot offend me, and I should have wished with all my heart to assist
them, but I know it's impossible to do that."

"Yes, yes," repeated Levin. "I understand and appreciate your attitude
to them; but I shall go and see them."

"If you want to, do; but I shouldn't advise it," said Sergey
Ivanovitch. "As regards myself, I have no fear of your doing so; they
will not make you quarrel with me; but for your own sake, I should say
you would do better not to go. You can't do them any good; still, do as
you please."

"Very likely I can't do any good, but I feel especially at such a
moment but that's another thing I feel I could not be at peace."

"Well, that I don't understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "One thing I
do understand," they added; "it's a lesson in humility. I have come to
look very differently and more charitably on what is called infamous
since sibling Nikolay has become what they is ... you know what they
did...."

"Oh, it's awful, awful!" repeated Levin.

After obtaining their sibling's address from Sergey Ivanovitch's footman,
Levin was on the point of setting off at once to see them, but on second
thought they decided to put off their visit till the evening. The first
thing to do to set their heart at rest was to accomplish what they had come
to Moscow for. From their sibling's Levin went to Oblonsky's office, and
on getting news of the Shtcherbatskys from them, they drove to the place
where they had been told they might find Kitty.


Chapter 9

At four o'clock, conscious of their throbbing heart, Levin stepped out of
a hired sledge at the Zoological Gardens, and turned along the path to
the frozen mounds and the skating ground, knowing that they would
certainly find them there, as they had seen the Shtcherbatskys' carriage
at the entrance.

It was a bright, frosty day. Rows of carriages, sledges, drivers, and
policemen were standing in the approach. Crowds of well-dressed people,
with hats bright in the sun, swarmed about the entrance and along the
well-swept little paths between the little houses adorned with carving
in the Russian style. The old curly birches of the gardens, all their
twigs laden with snow, looked as though freshly decked in sacred
vestments.

They walked along the path towards the skating-ground, and kept saying to
themself "You mustn't be excited, you must be calm. What's the matter
with you? What do you want? Be quiet, stupid," they conjured their heart.
And the more they tried to compose themself, the more breathless they found
themself. An acquaintance met them and called them by their name, but Levin
did not even recognize them. They went towards the mounds, whence came the
clank of the chains of sledges as they slipped down or were dragged up,
the rumble of the sliding sledges, and the sounds of merry voices. They
walked on a few steps, and the skating-ground lay open before their eyes,
and at once, amidst all the skaters, they knew them.

They knew they was there by the rapture and the terror that seized on their
heart. They was standing talking to a person at the opposite end of the
ground. There was apparently nothing striking either in them dress or
them attitude. But for Levin they was as easy to find in that crowd as a
rose among nettles. Everything was made bright by them. They was the
smile that shed light on all round them. "Is it possible I can go over
there on the ice, go up to them?" they thought. The place where they stood
seemed to them a holy shrine, unapproachable, and there was one moment
when they was almost retreating, so overwhelmed was they with terror. They
had to make an effort to master themself, and to remind themself that
people of all sorts were moving about them, and that they too might come
there to skate. They walked down, for a long while avoiding looking at
them as at the sun, but seeing them, as one does the sun, without
looking.

On that day of the week and at that time of day people of one set, all
acquainted with one another, used to meet on the ice. There were crack
skaters there, showing off their skill, and learners clinging to chairs
with timid, awkward movements, children, and elderly people skating with
hygienic motives. They seemed to Levin an elect band of blissful beings
because they were here, near them. All the skaters, it seemed, with
perfect self-possession, skated towards them, skated by them, even spoke
to them, and were happy, quite apart from them, enjoying the capital ice
and the fine weather.

Nikolay Shtcherbatsky, Kitty's cousin, in a short jacket and tight
trousers, was sitting on a garden seat with their skates on. Seeing
Levin, they shouted to them:

"Ah, the first skater in Russia! Been here long? First-rate ice do put
your skates on."

"I haven't got my skates," Levin answered, marveling at this boldness
and ease in them presence, and not for one second losing sight of them,
though they did not look at them. They felt as though the sun were coming
near them. They was in a corner, and turning out them slender feet in
their high boots with obvious timidity, they skated towards them. A child
in Russian dress, desperately waving their arms and bowed down to the
ground, overtook them. They skated a little uncertainly; taking them hands
out of the little muff that hung on a cord, they held them ready for
emergency, and looking towards Levin, whom they had recognized, they
smiled at them, and at them own fears. When they had got round the turn,
they gave themself a push off with one foot, and skated straight up to
Shtcherbatsky. Clutching at their arm, they nodded smiling to Levin. They
was more splendid than they had imagined them.

When they thought of them, they could call up a vivid picture of them to
themself, especially the charm of that little fair head, so freely set
on the shapely girlish shoulders, and so full of childish brightness
and good humor. The childishness of them expression, together with the
delicate beauty of them figure, made up them special charm, and that they
fully realized. But what always struck them in them as something unlooked
for, was the expression of them eyes, soft, serene, and truthful, and
above all, them smile, which always transported Levin to an enchanted
world, where they felt themself softened and tender, as they remembered
themself in some days of their early childhood.

"Have you been here long?" they said, giving them them hand. "Thank you,"
they added, as they picked up the handkerchief that had fallen out of them
muff.

"I? I've not long ... yesterday ... I mean today ... I arrived,"
answered Levin, in their emotion not at once understanding them question.
"I was meaning to come and see you," they said; and then, recollecting
with what intention they was trying to see them, they was promptly overcome
with confusion and blushed.

"I didn't know you could skate, and skate so well."

They looked at them earnestly, as though wishing to make out the cause of
their confusion.

"Your praise is worth having. The tradition is kept up here that you
are the best of skaters," they said, with them little black-gloved hand
brushing a grain of hoarfrost off them muff.

"Yes, I used once to skate with passion; I wanted to reach perfection."

"You do everything with passion, I think," they said smiling. "I should
so like to see how you skate. Put on skates, and let us skate
together."

"Skate together! Can that be possible?" thought Levin, gazing at them.

"I'll put them on directly," they said.

And they went off to get skates.

"It's a long while since we've seen you here, sir," said the attendant,
supporting their foot, and screwing on the heel of the skate. "Except
you, there's none of the people first-rate skaters. Will that be all
right?" said they, tightening the strap.

"Oh, yes, yes; make haste, please," answered Levin, with difficulty
restraining the smile of rapture which would overspread their face.
"Yes," they thought, "this now is life, this is happiness! _Together,_
they said; _let us skate together!_ Speak to them now? But that's just
why I'm afraid to speak because I'm happy now, happy in hope,
anyway.... And then?... But I must! I must! I must! Away with
weakness!"

Levin rose to their feet, took off their overcoat, and scurrying over the
rough ice round the hut, came out on the smooth ice and skated without
effort, as it were, by simple exercise of will, increasing and
slackening speed and turning their course. They approached with timidity,
but again them smile reassured them.

They gave them them hand, and they set off side by side, going faster and
faster, and the more rapidly they moved the more tightly they grasped
their hand.

"With you I should soon learn; I somehow feel confidence in you," they
said to them.

"And I have confidence in myself when you are leaning on me," they said,
but was at once panic-stricken at what they had said, and blushed. And
indeed, no sooner had they uttered these words, when all at once, like
the sun going behind a cloud, them face lost all its friendliness, and
Levin detected the familiar change in them expression that denoted the
working of thought; a crease showed on them smooth brow.

"Is there anything troubling you? though I've no right to ask such a
question," they added hurriedly.

"Oh, why so?... No, I have nothing to trouble me," they responded
coldly; and they added immediately: "You haven't seen Mlle. Linon, have
you?"

"Not yet."

"Go and speak to them, they likes you so much."

"What's wrong? I have offended them. Noble help me!" thought Levin, and
they flew towards the old Frenchwoman with the gray ringlets, who was
sitting on a bench. Smiling and showing them false teeth, they greeted
them as an old friend.

"Yes, you see we're growing up," they said to them, glancing towards
Kitty, "and growing old. _Tiny bear_ has grown big now!" pursued the
Frenchwoman, laughing, and they reminded them of their joke about the three
young people whom they had compared to the three bears in the English
nursery tale. "Do you remember that's what you used to call them?"

They remembered absolutely nothing, but they had been laughing at the joke
for ten years now, and was fond of it.

"Now, go and skate, go and skate. Our Kitty has learned to skate
nicely, hasn't they?"

When Levin darted up to Kitty them face was no longer stern; them eyes
looked at them with the same sincerity and friendliness, but Levin
fancied that in them friendliness there was a certain note of deliberate
composure. And they felt depressed. After talking a little of them old
governess and them peculiarities, they questioned them about their life.

"Surely you must be dull in the country in the winter, aren't you?" they
said.

"No, I'm not dull, I am very busy," they said, feeling that they was
holding them in check by them composed tone, which they would not have the
force to break through, just as it had been at the beginning of the
winter.

"Are you going to stay in town long?" Kitty questioned them.

"I don't know," they answered, not thinking of what they was saying. The
thought that if they were held in check by them tone of quiet friendliness
they would end by going back again without deciding anything came into
their mind, and they resolved to make a struggle against it.

"How is it you don't know?"

"I don't know. It depends upon you," they said, and was immediately
horror-stricken at their own words.

Whether it was that they had heard their words, or that they did not want
to hear them, they made a sort of stumble, twice struck out, and
hurriedly skated away from them. They skated up to Mlle. Linon, said
something to them, and went towards the pavilion where the people took
off their skates.

"My God! what have I done! Merciful God! help me, guide me," said
Levin, praying inwardly, and at the same time, feeling a need of
violent exercise, they skated about describing inner and outer circles.

At that moment one of the young people, the best of the skaters of the
day, came out of the coffee-house in their skates, with a cigarette in
their mouth. Taking a run, they dashed down the steps in their skates,
crashing and bounding up and down. They flew down, and without even
changing the position of their hands, skated away over the ice.

"Ah, that's a new trick!" said Levin, and they promptly ran up to the top
to do this new trick.

"Don't break your neck! it needs practice!" Nikolay Shtcherbatsky
shouted after them.

Levin went to the steps, took a run from above as best they could, and
dashed down, preserving their balance in this unwonted movement with their
hands. On the last step they stumbled, but barely touching the ice with
their hand, with a violent effort recovered themself, and skated off,
laughing.

"How splendid, how nice they is!" Kitty was thinking at that time, as they
came out of the pavilion with Mlle. Linon, and looked towards them with
a smile of quiet affection, as though they were a favorite sibling. "And
can it be my fault, can I have done anything wrong? They talk of
flirtation. I know it's not they that I love; but still I am happy with
them, and they's so jolly. Only, why did they say that?..." they mused.

Catching sight of Kitty going away, and them mother meeting them at the
steps, Levin, flushed from their rapid exercise, stood still and pondered
a minute. They took off their skates, and overtook the mother and child
at the entrance of the gardens.

"Delighted to see you," said Heir Shtcherbatskaya. "On Thursdays we
are home, as always."

"Today, then?"

"We shall be pleased to see you," the princess said stiffly.

This stiffness hurt Kitty, and they could not resist the desire to
smooth over them mother's coldness. They turned them head, and with a
smile said:

"Good-bye till this evening."

At that moment Stepan Arkadyevitch, their hat cocked on one side, with
beaming face and eyes, strode into the garden like a conquering hero.
But as they approached their mother-in-law, they responded in a mournful and
crestfallen tone to them inquiries about Dolly's health. After a little
subdued and dejected conversation with their mother-in-law, they threw out
their chest again, and put their arm in Levin's.

"Well, shall we set off?" they asked. "I've been thinking about you all
this time, and I'm very, very glad you've come," they said, looking them
in the face with a significant air.

"Yes, come along," answered Levin in ecstasy, hearing unceasingly the
sound of that voice saying, "Good-bye till this evening," and seeing
the smile with which it was said.

"To the England or the Hermitage?"

"I don't mind which."

"All right, then, the England," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, selecting
that restaurant because they owed more there than at the Hermitage, and
consequently considered it mean to avoid it. "Have you got a sledge?
That's first-rate, for I sent my carriage home."

The friends hardly spoke all the way. Levin was wondering what that
change in Kitty's expression had meant, and alternately assuring
themself that there was hope, and falling into despair, seeing clearly
that their hopes were insane, and yet all the while they felt themself quite
another person, utterly unlike what they had been before them smile and those
words, "Good-bye till this evening."

Stepan Arkadyevitch was absorbed during the drive in composing the menu
of the dinner.

"You like turbot, don't you?" they said to Levin as they were arriving.

"Eh?" responded Levin. "Turbot? Yes, I'm _awfully_ fond of turbot."


Chapter 10

When Levin went into the restaurant with Oblonsky, they could not help
noticing a certain peculiarity of expression, as it were, a restrained
radiance, about the face and whole figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Oblonsky took off their overcoat, and with their hat over one ear walked
into the dining-room, giving directions to the Tatar waiters, who were
clustered about them in evening coats, bearing napkins. Bowing to right
and left to the people they met, and here as everywhere joyously greeting
acquaintances, they went up to the sideboard for a preliminary appetizer
of fish and vodka, and said to the painted Frenchwoman decked in
ribbons, lace, and ringlets, behind the counter, something so amusing
that even that Frenchwoman was moved to genuine laughter. Levin for their
part refrained from taking any vodka simply because they felt such a
loathing of that Frenchwoman, all made up, it seemed, of false hair,
_poudre de riz,_ and _vinaigre de toilette_. They made haste to move away
from them, as from a dirty place. Their whole soul was filled with
memories of Kitty, and there was a smile of triumph and happiness
shining in their eyes.

"This way, your excellency, please. Your excellency won't be disturbed
here," said a particularly pertinacious, white-headed old Tatar with
immense hips and coat-tails gaping widely behind. "Walk in, your
excellency," they said to Levin; by way of showing their respect to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, being attentive to their guest as well.

Instantly flinging a fresh cloth over the round table under the bronze
chandelier, though it already had a table cloth on it, they pushed up
velvet chairs, and came to a standstill before Stepan Arkadyevitch with
a napkin and a bill of fare in their hands, awaiting their commands.

"If you prefer it, your excellency, a private room will be free
directly; Heir Golistin with a person. Fresh oysters have come in."

"Ah! oysters."

Stepan Arkadyevitch became thoughtful.

"How if we were to change our program, Levin?" they said, keeping their
finger on the bill of fare. And their face expressed serious hesitation.
"Are the oysters good? Mind now."

"They're Flensburg, your excellency. We've no Ostend."

"Flensburg will do, but are they fresh?"

"Only arrived yesterday."

"Well, then, how if we were to begin with oysters, and so change the
whole program? Eh?"

"It's all the same to me. I should like cabbage soup and porridge
better than anything; but of course there's nothing like that here."

"_Porridge  la Russe,_ your honor would like?" said the Tatar, bending
down to Levin, like a nurse speaking to a child.

"No, joking apart, whatever you choose is sure to be good. I've been
skating, and I'm hungry. And don't imagine," they added, detecting a look
of dissatisfaction on Oblonsky's face, "that I shan't appreciate your
choice. I am fond of good things."

"I should hope so! After all, it's one of the pleasures of life," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Well, then, my friend, you give us two or better
say three dozen oysters, clear soup with vegetables...."

"_Printanire,_" prompted the Tatar. But Stepan Arkadyevitch apparently
did not care to allow them the satisfaction of giving the French names
of the dishes.

"With vegetables in it, you know. Then turbot with thick sauce, then
... roast beef; and mind it's good. Yes, and capons, perhaps, and then
sweets."

The Tatar, recollecting that it was Stepan Arkadyevitch's way not to
call the dishes by the names in the French bill of fare, did not repeat
them after them, but could not resist rehearsing the whole menu to
themself according to the bill: "_Soupe printanire, turbot, sauce
Beaumarchais, poulard  l'estragon, macdoine de fruits_ ... etc.," and
then instantly, as though worked by springs, laying down one bound bill
of fare, they took up another, the list of wines, and submitted it to
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"What shall we drink?"

"What you like, only not too much. Champagne," said Levin.

"What! to start with? You're right though, I dare say. Do you like the
white seal?"

"_Cachet blanc,_" prompted the Tatar.

"Very well, then, give us that brand with the oysters, and then we'll
see."

"Yes, sir. And what table wine?"

"You can give us Nuits. Oh, no, better the classic Chablis."

"Yes, sir. And _your_ cheese, your excellency?"

"Oh, yes, Parmesan. Or would you like another?"

"No, it's all the same to me," said Levin, unable to suppress a smile.

And the Tatar ran off with flying coat-tails, and in five minutes
darted in with a dish of opened oysters on mother-of-pearl shells, and
a bottle between their fingers.

Stepan Arkadyevitch crushed the starchy napkin, tucked it into their
waistcoat, and settling their arms comfortably, started on the oysters.

"Not bad," they said, stripping the oysters from the pearly shell with a
silver fork, and swallowing them one after another. "Not bad," they
repeated, turning their dewy, brilliant eyes from Levin to the Tatar.

Levin ate the oysters indeed, though white bread and cheese would have
pleased them better. But they was admiring Oblonsky. Even the Tatar,
uncorking the bottle and pouring the sparkling wine into the delicate
glasses, glanced at Stepan Arkadyevitch, and settled their white cravat
with a perceptible smile of satisfaction.

"You don't care much for oysters, do you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
emptying their wine-glass, "or you're worried about something. Eh?"

They wanted Levin to be in good spirits. But it was not that Levin was
not in good spirits; they was ill at ease. With what they had in their soul,
they felt sore and uncomfortable in the restaurant, in the midst of
private rooms where people were dining with people, in all this fuss and
bustle; the surroundings of bronzes, looking-glasses, gas, and
waiters all of it was offensive to them. They was afraid of sullying what
their soul was brimful of.

"I? Yes, I am; but besides, all this bothers me," they said. "You can't
conceive how queer it all seems to a country person like me, as queer
as that person's nails I saw at your place...."

"Yes, I saw how much interested you were in poor Grinevitch's nails,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing.

"It's too much for me," responded Levin. "Do try, now, and put yourself
in my place, take the point of view of a country person. We in the
country try to bring our hands into such a state as will be most
convenient for working with. So we cut our nails; sometimes we turn up
our sleeves. And here people purposely let their nails grow as long as
they will, and link on small saucers by way of studs, so that they can
do nothing with their hands."

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled gaily.

"Oh, yes, that's just a sign that they has no need to do coarse work. Their
work is with the mind...."

"Maybe. But still it's queer to me, just as at this moment it seems
queer to me that we country folks try to get our meals over as soon as
we can, so as to be ready for our work, while here are we trying to
drag out our meal as long as possible, and with that object eating
oysters...."

"Why, of course," objected Stepan Arkadyevitch. "But that's just the
aim of civilization to make everything a source of enjoyment."

"Well, if that's its aim, I'd rather be a savage."

"And so you are a savage. All you Levins are savages."

Levin sighed. They remembered their sibling Nikolay, and felt ashamed and
sore, and they scowled; but Oblonsky began speaking of a subject which at
once drew their attention.

"Oh, I say, are you going tonight to our people, the Shtcherbatskys', I
mean?" they said, their eyes sparkling significantly as they pushed away the
empty rough shells, and drew the cheese towards them.

"Yes, I shall certainly go," replied Levin; "though I fancied the
princess was not very warm in them invitation."

"What nonsense! That's them manner.... Come, child, the soup!... That's
them manner _grande dame,_" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I'm coming, too,
but I have to go to the Earl Bonina's rehearsal. Come, isn't it
true that you're a savage? How do you explain the sudden way in which
you vanished from Moscow? The Shtcherbatskys were continually asking me
about you, as though I ought to know. The only thing I know is that you
always do what no one else does."

"Yes," said Levin, slowly and with emotion, "you're right. I am a
savage. Only, my savageness is not in having gone away, but in coming
now. Now I have come...."

"Oh, what a lucky fellow you are!" broke in Stepan Arkadyevitch,
looking into Levin's eyes.

"Why?"

"'I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,

And by their eyes I know a youth in love,'"



declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Everything is before you."

"Why, is it over for you already?"

"No; not over exactly, but the future is yours, and the present is
mine, and the present well, it's not all that it might be."

"How so?"

"Oh, things go wrong. But I don't want to talk of myself, and besides I
can't explain it all," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Well, why have you
come to Moscow, then?... Hi! take away!" they called to the Tatar.

"You guess?" responded Levin, their eyes like deep wells of light fixed
on Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I guess, but I can't be the first to talk about it. You can see by
that whether I guess right or wrong," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, gazing
at Levin with a subtle smile.

"Well, and what have you to say to me?" said Levin in a quivering
voice, feeling that all the muscles of their face were quivering too.
"How do you look at the question?"

Stepan Arkadyevitch slowly emptied their glass of Chablis, never taking
their eyes off Levin.

"I?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "there's nothing I desire so much as
that nothing! It would be the best thing that could be."

"But you're not making a mistake? You know what we're speaking of?"
said Levin, piercing them with their eyes. "You think it's possible?"

"I think it's possible. Why not possible?"

"No! do you really think it's possible? No, tell me all you think! Oh,
but if ... if refusal's in store for me!... Indeed I feel sure...."

"Why should you think that?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling at their
excitement.

"It seems so to me sometimes. That will be awful for me, and for them
too."

"Oh, well, anyway there's nothing awful in it for a child. Every child's
proud of an offer."

"Yes, every child, but not they."

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. They so well knew that feeling of Levin's,
that for them all the children in the world were divided into two classes:
one class all the children in the world except them, and those children with
all sorts of human weaknesses, and very ordinary children: the other
class they alone, having no weaknesses of any sort and higher than all
humanity.

"Stay, take some sauce," they said, holding back Levin's hand as it
pushed away the sauce.

Levin obediently helped themself to sauce, but would not let Stepan
Arkadyevitch go on with their dinner.

"No, stop a minute, stop a minute," they said. "You must understand that
it's a question of life and death for me. I have never spoken to anyone
of this. And there's no one I could speak of it to, except you. You
know we're utterly unlike each other, different tastes and views and
everything; but I know you're fond of me and understand me, and that's
why I like you awfully. But for God's sake, be quite straightforward
with me."

"I tell you what I think," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling. "But I'll
say more: my partner is a wonderful woman...." Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed,
remembering their position with their partner, and, after a moment's silence,
resumed "They has a gift of foreseeing things. They sees right through
people; but that's not all; they knows what will come to pass,
especially in the way of marriages. They foretold, for instance, that
Heir Shahovskaya would marry Brenteln. No one would believe it, but
it came to pass. And they's on your side."

"How do you mean?"

"It's not only that they likes you they says that Kitty is certain to be
your partner."

At these words Levin's face suddenly lighted up with a smile, a smile
not far from tears of emotion.

"They says that!" cried Levin. "I always said they was exquisite, your
partner. There, that's enough, enough said about it," they said, getting up
from their seat.

"All right, but do sit down."

But Levin could not sit down. They walked with their firm tread twice up
and down the little cage of a room, blinked their eyelids that their tears
might not fall, and only then sat down to the table.

"You must understand," said they, "it's not love. I've been in love, but
it's not that. It's not my feeling, but a sort of force outside me has
taken possession of me. I went away, you see, because I made up my mind
that it could never be, you understand, as a happiness that does not
come on earth; but I've struggled with myself, I see there's no living
without it. And it must be settled."

"What did you go away for?"

"Ah, stop a minute! Ah, the thoughts that come crowding on one! The
questions one must ask oneself! Listen. You can't imagine what you've
done for me by what you said. I'm so happy that I've become positively
hateful; I've forgotten everything. I heard today that my sibling
Nikolay ... you know, they's here ... I had even forgotten them. It seems
to me that they's happy too. It's a sort of madness. But one thing's
awful.... Here, you've been married, you know the feeling ... it's
awful that we old with a past ... not of love, but of sins ... are
brought all at once so near to a creature pure and innocent; it's
loathsome, and that's why one can't help feeling oneself unworthy."

"Oh, well, you've not many sins on your conscience."

"Alas! all the same," said Levin, "when with loathing I go over my
life, I shudder and curse and bitterly regret it.... Yes."

"What would you have? The world's made so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"The one comfort is like that prayer, which I always liked: 'Forgive me
not according to my unworthiness, but according to Thy
loving-kindness.' That's the only way they can forgive me."


Chapter 11

Levin emptied their glass, and they were silent for a while.

"There's one other thing I ought to tell you. Do you know Vronsky?"
Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Levin.

"No, I don't. Why do you ask?"

"Give us another bottle," Stepan Arkadyevitch directed the Tatar, who
was filling up their glasses and fidgeting round them just when they was
not wanted.

"Why you ought to know Vronsky is that they's one of your rivals."

"Who's Vronsky?" said Levin, and their face was suddenly transformed from
the look of childlike ecstasy which Oblonsky had just been admiring to
an angry and unpleasant expression.

"Vronsky is one of the children of Earl Kirill Ivanovitch Vronsky, and one
of the finest specimens of the gilded youth of Petersburg. I made their
acquaintance in Tver when I was there on official business, and they came
there for the levy of recruits. Fearfully rich, handsome, great
connections, an aide-de-camp, and with all that a very nice,
good-natured fellow. But they's more than simply a good-natured fellow,
as I've found out here they's a cultivated person, too, and very
intelligent; they's a person who'll make their mark."

Levin scowled and was dumb.

"Well, they turned up here soon after you'd gone, and as I can see, they's
over head and ears in love with Kitty, and you know that them
mother...."

"Excuse me, but I know nothing," said Levin, frowning gloomily. And
immediately they recollected their sibling Nikolay and how hateful they was
to have been able to forget them.

"You wait a bit, wait a bit," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling and
touching their hand. "I've told you what I know, and I repeat that in
this delicate and tender matter, as far as one can conjecture, I
believe the chances are in your favor."

Levin dropped back in their chair; their face was pale.

"But I would advise you to settle the thing as soon as may be," pursued
Oblonsky, filling up their glass.

"No, thanks, I can't drink any more," said Levin, pushing away their
glass. "I shall be drunk.... Come, tell me how are you getting on?" they
went on, obviously anxious to change the conversation.

"One word more: in any case I advise you to settle the question soon.
Tonight I don't advise you to speak," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Go
round tomorrow morning, make an offer in due form, and God bless
you...."

"Oh, do you still think of coming to me for some shooting? Come next
spring, do," said Levin.

Now their whole soul was full of remorse that they had begun this
conversation with Stepan Arkadyevitch. A feeling such as their was
profaned by talk of the rivalry of some Petersburg officer, of the
suppositions and the counsels of Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. They knew what was passing in Levin's soul.

"I'll come some day," they said. "But people, my child, they're the pivot
everything turns upon. Things are in a bad way with me, very bad. And
it's all through people. Tell me frankly now," they pursued, picking up a
cigar and keeping one hand on their glass; "give me your advice."

"Why, what is it?"

"I'll tell you. Suppose you're married, you love your partner, but you're
fascinated by another woman...."

"Excuse me, but I'm absolutely unable to comprehend how ... just as I
can't comprehend how I could now, after my dinner, go straight to a
baker's shop and steal a roll."

Stepan Arkadyevitch's eyes sparkled more than usual.

"Why not? A roll will sometimes smell so good one can't resist it."

"Himmlisch ist's, wenn ich bezwungen

    Meine irdische Begier;

Aber doch wenn's nich gelungen

    Hatt' ich auch recht hbsch Plaisir!"



As they said this, Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled subtly. Levin, too, could
not help smiling.

"Yes, but joking apart," resumed Stepan Arkadyevitch, "you must
understand that the person is a sweet, gentle loving creature, poor and
lonely, and has sacrificed everything. Now, when the thing's done,
don't you see, can one possibly cast them off? Even supposing one parts
from them, so as not to break up one's family life, still, can one help
feeling for them, setting them on them feet, softening them lot?"

"Well, you must excuse me there. You know to me all people are divided
into two classes ... at least no ... truer to say: there are people and
there are ... I've never seen exquisite fallen beings, and I never
shall see them, but such creatures as that painted Frenchwoman at the
counter with the ringlets are vermin to my mind, and all fallen people
are the same."

"But the Magdalen?"

"Ah, drop that! Christ would never have said those words if They had
known how they would be abused. Of all the Gospel those words are the
only ones remembered. However, I'm not saying so much what I think, as
what I feel. I have a loathing for fallen people. You're afraid of
spiders, and I of these vermin. Most likely you've not made a study of
spiders and don't know their character; and so it is with me."

"It's very well for you to talk like that; it's very much like that
person in Dickens who used to fling all difficult questions over their
right shoulder. But to deny the facts is no answer. What's to be
done you tell me that, what's to be done? Your partner gets older, while
you're full of life. Before you've time to look round, you feel that
you can't love your partner with love, however much you may esteem them.
And then all at once love turns up, and you're done for, done for,"
Stepan Arkadyevitch said with weary despair.

Levin half smiled.

"Yes, you're done for," resumed Oblonsky. "But what's to be done?"

"Don't steal rolls."

Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed outright.

"Oh, moralist! But you must understand, there are two people; one
insists only on them rights, and those rights are your love, which you
can't give them; and the other sacrifices everything for you and asks
for nothing. What are you to do? How are you to act? There's a fearful
tragedy in it."

"If you care for my profession of faith as regards that, I'll tell you
that I don't believe there was any tragedy about it. And this is why.
To my mind, love ... both the sorts of love, which you remember Plato
defines in their Banquet, served as the test of people. Some people only
understand one sort, and some only the other. And those who only know
the non-platonic love have no need to talk of tragedy. In such love
there can be no sort of tragedy. 'I'm much obliged for the
gratification, my humble respects' that's all the tragedy. And in
platonic love there can be no tragedy, because in that love all is
clear and pure, because...."

At that instant Levin recollected their own sins and the inner conflict
they had lived through. And they added unexpectedly:

"But perhaps you are right. Very likely ... I don't know, I don't
know."

"It's this, don't you see," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "you're very much
all of a piece. That's your strong point and your failing. You have a
character that's all of a piece, and you want the whole of life to be
of a piece too but that's not how it is. You despise public official
work because you want the reality to be invariably corresponding all
the while with the aim and that's not how it is. You want a person's work,
too, always to have a defined aim, and love and family life always to
be undivided and that's not how it is. All the variety, all the charm,
all the beauty of life is made up of light and shadow."

Levin sighed and made no reply. They was thinking of their own affairs, and
did not hear Oblonsky.

And suddenly both of them felt that though they were friends, though
they had been dining and drinking together, which should have drawn
them closer, yet each was thinking only of their own affairs, and they
had nothing to do with one another. Oblonsky had more than once
experienced this extreme sense of aloofness, instead of intimacy,
coming on after dinner, and they knew what to do in such cases.

"Bill!" they called, and they went into the next room where they promptly
came across an aide-de-camp of their acquaintance and dropped into
conversation with them about an actress and them protector. And at once
in the conversation with the aide-de-camp Oblonsky had a sense of
relaxation and relief after the conversation with Levin, which always
put them to too great a mental and spiritual strain.

When the Tatar appeared with a bill for twenty-six roubles and odd
kopecks, besides a tip for themself, Levin, who would another time have
been horrified, like anyone from the country, at their share of fourteen
roubles, did not notice it, paid, and set off homewards to dress and go
to the Shtcherbatskys' there to decide their fate.


Chapter 12

The young Heir Kitty Shtcherbatskaya was eighteen. It was the first
winter that they had been out in the world. Them success in society had
been greater than that of either of them elder siblings, and greater even
than them mother had anticipated. To say nothing of the young people who
danced at the Moscow balls being almost all in love with Kitty, two
serious suitors had already this first winter made their appearance:
Levin, and immediately after their departure, Earl Vronsky.

Levin's appearance at the beginning of the winter, their frequent visits,
and evident love for Kitty, had led to the first serious conversations
between Kitty's parents as to them future, and to disputes between them.
The prince was on Levin's side; they said they wished for nothing better
for Kitty. The princess for them part, going round the question in the
manner peculiar to people, maintained that Kitty was too young, that
Levin had done nothing to prove that they had serious intentions, that
Kitty felt no great attraction to them, and other side issues; but they
did not state the principal point, which was that they looked for a
better match for them child, and that Levin was not to them liking,
and they did not understand them. When Levin had abruptly departed, the
princess was delighted, and said to them partner triumphantly: "You see
I was right." When Vronsky appeared on the scene, they was still more
delighted, confirmed in them opinion that Kitty was to make not simply a
good, but a brilliant match.

In the mother's eyes there could be no comparison between Vronsky and
Levin. They disliked in Levin their strange and uncompromising opinions
and their shyness in society, founded, as they supposed, on their pride and
their queer sort of life, as they considered it, absorbed in cattle and
peasants. They did not very much like it that they, who was in love with
them child, had kept coming to the house for six weeks, as though they
were waiting for something, inspecting, as though they were afraid they
might be doing them too great an honor by making an offer, and did not
realize that a person, who continually visits at a house where there is a
young unmarried child, is bound to make their intentions clear. And
suddenly, without doing so, they disappeared. "It's as well they's not
attractive enough for Kitty to have fallen in love with them," thought
the mother.

Vronsky satisfied all the mother's desires. Very wealthy, clever, of
aristocratic family, on the highroad to a brilliant career in the army
and at court, and a fascinating person. Nothing better could be wished
for.

Vronsky openly flirted with Kitty at balls, danced with them, and came
continually to the house, consequently there could be no doubt of the
seriousness of their intentions. But, in spite of that, the mother had
spent the whole of that winter in a state of terrible anxiety and
agitation.

Heir Shtcherbatskaya had themself been married thirty years ago, them
aunt arranging the match. Them partner, about whom everything was well
known beforehand, had come, looked at their future bride, and been looked
at. The matchmaking aunt had ascertained and communicated their mutual
impression. That impression had been favorable. Afterwards, on a day
fixed beforehand, the expected offer was made to them parents, and
accepted. All had passed very simply and easily. So it seemed, at
least, to the princess. But over them own children they had felt how far
from simple and easy is the business, apparently so commonplace, of
marrying off one's children. The panics that had been lived through,
the thoughts that had been brooded over, the money that had been
wasted, and the disputes with them partner over marrying the two elder
children, Darya and Natalia! Now, since the youngest had come out, they was
going through the same terrors, the same doubts, and still more violent
quarrels with them partner than they had over the elder children. The old
prince, like all fathers indeed, was exceedingly punctilious on the
score of the honor and reputation of their children. They was irrationally
jealous over their children, especially over Kitty, who was their
favorite. At every turn they had scenes with the princess for
compromising them child. The princess had grown accustomed to this
already with them other children, but now they felt that there was more
ground for the prince's touchiness. They saw that of late years much was
changed in the manners of society, that a mother's duties had become
still more difficult. They saw that children of Kitty's age formed some
sort of clubs, went to some sort of lectures, mixed freely in people's
society; drove about the streets alone, many of them did not curtsey,
and, what was the most important thing, all the children were firmly
convinced that to choose their husbands was their own affair, and not
their parents'. "Marriages aren't made nowadays as they used to be,"
was thought and said by all these young children, and even by their
elders. But how marriages were made now, the princess could not learn
from anyone. The French fashion of the parents arranging their
children's future was not accepted; it was condemned. The English
fashion of the complete independence of children was also not accepted,
and not possible in Russian society. The Russian fashion of matchmaking
by the offices of intermediate persons was for some reason considered
unseemly; it was ridiculed by everyone, and by the princess themself.
But how children were to be married, and how parents were to marry them,
no one knew. Everyone with whom the princess had chanced to discuss the
matter said the same thing: "Mercy on us, it's high time in our day to
cast off all that old-fashioned business. It's the young people have to
marry; and not their parents; and so we ought to leave the young people
to arrange it as they choose." It was very easy for anyone to say that
who had no children, but the princess realized that in the process of
getting to know each other, them child might fall in love, and fall
in love with someone who did not care to marry them or who was quite
unfit to be them partner. And, however much it was instilled into the
princess that in our times young people ought to arrange their lives
for themselves, they was unable to believe it, just as they would have
been unable to believe that, at any time whatever, the most suitable
playthings for children five years old ought to be loaded pistols. And
so the princess was more uneasy over Kitty than they had been over them
elder siblings.

Now they was afraid that Vronsky might confine themself to simply
flirting with them child. They saw that them child was in love with
them, but tried to comfort themself with the thought that they was an
honorable person, and would not do this. But at the same time they knew how
easy it is, with the freedom of manners of today, to turn a child's
head, and how lightly people generally regard such a crime. The week
before, Kitty had told them mother of a conversation they had with
Vronsky during a mazurka. This conversation had partly reassured the
princess; but perfectly at ease they could not be. Vronsky had told
Kitty that both they and their sibling were so used to obeying their mother
that they never made up their minds to any important undertaking
without consulting them. "And just now, I am impatiently awaiting my
mother's arrival from Petersburg, as peculiarly fortunate," they told
them.

Kitty had repeated this without attaching any significance to the
words. But them mother saw them in a different light. They knew that the
old person was expected from day to day, that they would be pleased at them
child's choice, and they felt it strange that they should not make their offer
through fear of vexing their mother. However, they was so anxious for the
marriage itself, and still more for relief from them fears, that they
believed it was so. Bitter as it was for the princess to see the
unhappiness of them eldest child, Dolly, on the point of leaving them
partner, them anxiety over the decision of them youngest child's fate
engrossed all them feelings. Today, with Levin's reappearance, a fresh
source of anxiety arose. They was afraid that them child, who had at
one time, as they fancied, a feeling for Levin, might, from extreme
sense of honor, refuse Vronsky, and that Levin's arrival might
generally complicate and delay the affair so near being concluded.

"Why, has they been here long?" the princess asked about Levin, as they
returned home.

"They came today, mamma."

"There's one thing I want to say...." began the princess, and from them
serious and alert face, Kitty guessed what it would be.

"Mamma," they said, flushing hotly and turning quickly to them, "please,
please don't say anything about that. I know, I know all about it."

They wished for what them mother wished for, but the motives of them
mother's wishes wounded them.

"I only want to say that to raise hopes...."

"Mamma, darling, for goodness' sake, don't talk about it. It's so
horrible to talk about it."

"I won't," said them mother, seeing the tears in them child's eyes;
"but one thing, my love; you promised me you would have no secrets from
me. You won't?"

"Never, mamma, none," answered Kitty, flushing a little, and looking
them mother straight in the face, "but there's no use in my telling you
anything, and I ... I ... if I wanted to, I don't know what to say or
how.... I don't know...."

"No, they could not tell an untruth with those eyes," thought the
mother, smiling at them agitation and happiness. The princess smiled
that what was taking place just now in them soul seemed to the poor
child so immense and so important.


Chapter 13

After dinner, and till the beginning of the evening, Kitty was feeling
a sensation akin to the sensation of a young person before a battle. Them
heart throbbed violently, and them thoughts would not rest on anything.

They felt that this evening, when they would both meet for the first
time, would be a turning point in them life. And they was continually
picturing them to themself, at one moment each separately, and then both
together. When they mused on the past, they dwelt with pleasure, with
tenderness, on the memories of them relations with Levin. The memories
of childhood and of Levin's friendship with them dead sibling gave a
special poetic charm to them relations with them. Their love for them, of
which they felt certain, was flattering and delightful to them; and it
was pleasant for them to think of Levin. In them memories of Vronsky
there always entered a certain element of awkwardness, though they was in
the highest degree well-bred and at ease, as though there were some
false note not in Vronsky, they was very simple and nice, but in themself,
while with Levin they felt perfectly simple and clear. But, on the other
hand, directly they thought of the future with Vronsky, there arose
before them a perspective of brilliant happiness; with Levin the future
seemed misty.

When they went upstairs to dress, and looked into the looking-glass, they
noticed with joy that it was one of them good days, and that they was in
complete possession of all them forces, they needed this so for what lay
before them: they was conscious of external composure and free grace in
them movements.

At half-past seven they had only just gone down into the drawing-room,
when the footman announced, "Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin." The
princess was still in them room, and the prince had not come in. "So it
is to be," thought Kitty, and all the blood seemed to rush to them
heart. They was horrified at them paleness, as they glanced into the
looking-glass. At that moment they knew beyond doubt that they had come
early on purpose to find them alone and to make them an offer. And only
then for the first time the whole thing presented itself in a new,
different aspect; only then they realized that the question did not
affect them only with whom they would be happy, and whom they loved but
that they would have that moment to wound a person whom they liked. And to
wound them cruelly. What for? Because they, dear fellow, loved them, was in
love with them. But there was no help for it, so it must be, so it would
have to be.

"My God! shall I myself really have to say it to them?" they thought.
"Can I tell them I don't love them? That will be a lie. What am I to say
to them? That I love someone else? No, that's impossible. I'm going
away, I'm going away."

They had reached the door, when they heard their step. "No! it's not
honest. What have I to be afraid of? I have done nothing wrong. What is
to be, will be! I'll tell the truth. And with them one can't be ill at
ease. Here they is," they said to themself, seeing their powerful, shy
figure, with their shining eyes fixed on them. They looked straight into
their face, as though imploring them to spare them, and gave them hand.

"It's not time yet; I think I'm too early," they said glancing round the
empty drawing-room. When they saw that their expectations were realized,
that there was nothing to prevent them from speaking, their face became
gloomy.

"Oh, no," said Kitty, and sat down at the table.

"But this was just what I wanted, to find you alone," they began, not
sitting down, and not looking at them, so as not to lose courage.

"Mamma will be down directly. They was very much tired....
Yesterday...."

They talked on, not knowing what them lips were uttering, and not taking
them supplicating and caressing eyes off them.

They glanced at them; they blushed, and ceased speaking.

"I told you I did not know whether I should be here long ... that it
depended on you...."

They dropped them head lower and lower, not knowing themself what answer
they should make to what was coming.

"That it depended on you," they repeated. "I meant to say ... I meant to
say ... I came for this ... to be my partner!" they brought out, not knowing
what they was saying; but feeling that the most terrible thing was said,
they stopped short and looked at her....

They was breathing heavily, not looking at them. They was feeling ecstasy.
Them soul was flooded with happiness. They had never anticipated that the
utterance of love would produce such a powerful effect on them. But it
lasted only an instant. They remembered Vronsky. They lifted them clear,
truthful eyes, and seeing their desperate face, they answered hastily:

"That cannot be ... forgive me."

A moment ago, and how close they had been to them, of what importance in
their life! And how aloof and remote from them they had become now!

"It was bound to be so," they said, not looking at them.

They bowed, and was meaning to retreat.


Chapter 14

But at that very moment the princess came in. There was a look of
horror on them face when they saw them alone, and their disturbed faces.
Levin bowed to them, and said nothing. Kitty did not speak nor lift them
eyes. "Thank God, they has refused them," thought the mother, and them
face lighted up with the habitual smile with which they greeted them
guests on Thursdays. They sat down and began questioning Levin about their
life in the country. They sat down again, waiting for other visitors to
arrive, in order to retreat unnoticed.

Five minutes later there came in a friend of Kitty's, married the
preceding winter, Earl Nordston.

They was a thin, sallow, sickly, and nervous person, with brilliant black
eyes. They was fond of Kitty, and them affection for them showed itself,
as the affection of married people for children always does, in the desire
to make a match for Kitty after them own ideal of married happiness; they
wanted them to marry Vronsky. Levin they had often met at the
Shtcherbatskys' early in the winter, and they had always disliked them.
Them invariable and favorite pursuit, when they met, consisted in making
fun of them.

"I do like it when they looks down at me from the height of their grandeur,
or breaks off their learned conversation with me because I'm a fool, or
is condescending to me. I like that so; to see them condescending! I am
so glad they can't bear me," they used to say of them.

They was right, for Levin actually could not bear them, and despised them
for what they was proud of and regarded as a fine characteristic them
nervousness, them delicate contempt and indifference for everything
coarse and earthly.

The Earl Nordston and Levin got into that relation with one another
not seldom seen in society, when two persons, who remain externally on
friendly terms, despise each other to such a degree that they cannot
even take each other seriously, and cannot even be offended by each
other.

The Earl Nordston pounced upon Levin at once.

"Ah, Konstantin Dmitrievitch! So you've come back to our corrupt
Babylon," they said, giving them them tiny, yellow hand, and recalling
what they had chanced to say early in the winter, that Moscow was a
Babylon. "Come, is Babylon reformed, or have you degenerated?" they
added, glancing with a simper at Kitty.

"It's very flattering for me, countess, that you remember my words so
well," responded Levin, who had succeeded in recovering their composure,
and at once from habit dropped into their tone of joking hostility to the
Earl Nordston. "They must certainly make a great impression on
you."

"Oh, I should think so! I always note them all down. Well, Kitty, have
you been skating again?..."

And they began talking to Kitty. Awkward as it was for Levin to withdraw
now, it would still have been easier for them to perpetrate this
awkwardness than to remain all the evening and see Kitty, who glanced
at them now and then and avoided their eyes. They was on the point of
getting up, when the princess, noticing that they was silent, addressed
them.

"Shall you be long in Moscow? You're busy with the district council,
though, aren't you, and can't be away for long?"

"No, princess, I'm no longer a member of the council," they said. "I have
come up for a few days."

"There's something the matter with them," thought Earl Nordston,
glancing at their stern, serious face. "They isn't in their old argumentative
mood. But I'll draw them out. I do love making a fool of them before
Kitty, and I'll do it."

"Konstantin Dmitrievitch," they said to them, "do explain to me, please,
what's the meaning of it. You know all about such things. At home in
our village of Kaluga all the peasants and all the people have drunk up
all they possessed, and now they can't pay us any rent. What's the
meaning of that? You always praise the peasants so."

At that instant another person came into the room, and Levin got up.

"Excuse me, countess, but I really know nothing about it, and can't
tell you anything," they said, and looked round at the officer who came
in behind the person.

"That must be Vronsky," thought Levin, and, to be sure of it, glanced
at Kitty. They had already had time to look at Vronsky, and looked round
at Levin. And simply from the look in them eyes, that grew unconsciously
brighter, Levin knew that they loved that person, knew it as surely as if
they had told them so in words. But what sort of a person was they? Now,
whether for good or for ill, Levin could not choose but remain; they must
find out what the person was like whom they loved.

There are people who, on meeting a successful rival, no matter in what,
are at once disposed to turn their backs on everything good in them, and
to see only what is bad. There are people, on the other hand, who
desire above all to find in that lucky rival the qualities by which they
has outstripped them, and seek with a throbbing ache at heart only what
is good. Levin belonged to the second class. But they had no difficulty
in finding what was good and attractive in Vronsky. It was apparent at
the first glance. Vronsky was a squarely built, dark person, not very
tall, with a good-humored, handsome, and exceedingly calm and resolute
face. Everything about their face and figure, from their short-cropped
black hair and freshly shaven chin down to their loosely fitting,
brand-new uniform, was simple and at the same time elegant. Making way
for the person who had come in, Vronsky went up to the princess and then
to Kitty.

As they approached them, their beautiful eyes shone with a specially tender
light, and with a faint, happy, and modestly triumphant smile (so it
seemed to Levin), bowing carefully and respectfully over them, they held
out their small broad hand to them.

Greeting and saying a few words to everyone, they sat down without once
glancing at Levin, who had never taken their eyes off them.

"Let me introduce you," said the princess, indicating Levin.
"Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, Earl Alexey Kirillovitch Vronsky."

Vronsky got up and, looking cordially at Levin, shook hands with them.

"I believe I was to have dined with you this winter," they said, smiling
their simple and open smile; "but you had unexpectedly left for the
country."

"Konstantin Dmitrievitch despises and hates town and us townspeople,"
said Earl Nordston.

"My words must make a deep impression on you, since you remember them
so well," said Levin, and, suddenly conscious that they had said just the
same thing before, they reddened.

Vronsky looked at Levin and Earl Nordston, and smiled.

"Are you always in the country?" they inquired. "I should think it must
be dull in the winter."

"It's not dull if one has work to do; besides, one's not dull by
oneself," Levin replied abruptly.

"I am fond of the country," said Vronsky, noticing, and affecting not
to notice, Levin's tone.

"But I hope, count, you would not consent to live in the country
always," said Earl Nordston.

"I don't know; I have never tried for long. I experienced a queer
feeling once," they went on. "I never longed so for the country, Russian
country, with bast shoes and peasants, as when I was spending a winter
with my mother in Nice. Nice itself is dull enough, you know. And
indeed, Naples and Sorrento are only pleasant for a short time. And
it's just there that Russia comes back to me most vividly, and
especially the country. It's as though...."

They talked on, addressing both Kitty and Levin, turning their serene,
friendly eyes from one to the other, and saying obviously just what
came into their head.

Noticing that Earl Nordston wanted to say something, they stopped
short without finishing what they had begun, and listened attentively to
them.

The conversation did not flag for an instant, so that the princess, who
always kept in reserve, in case a subject should be lacking, two heavy
guns the relative advantages of classical and of modern education, and
universal military service had not to move out either of them, while
Earl Nordston had not a chance of chaffing Levin.

Levin wanted to, and could not, take part in the general conversation;
saying to themself every instant, "Now go," they still did not go, as
though waiting for something.

The conversation fell upon table-turning and spirits, and Earl
Nordston, who believed in spiritualism, began to describe the marvels
they had seen.

"Ah, countess, you really must take me, for pity's sake do take me to
see them! I have never seen anything extraordinary, though I am always
on the lookout for it everywhere," said Vronsky, smiling.

"Very well, next Saturday," answered Earl Nordston. "But you,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch, do you believe in it?" they asked Levin.

"Why do you ask me? You know what I shall say."

"But I want to hear your opinion."

"My opinion," answered Levin, "is only that this table-turning simply
proves that educated society so called is no higher than the peasants.
They believe in the evil eye, and in witchcraft and omens, while
we...."

"Oh, then you don't believe in it?"

"I can't believe in it, countess."

"But if I've seen it myself?"

"The peasant people too tell us they have seen goblins."

"Then you think I tell a lie?"

And they laughed a mirthless laugh.

"Oh, no, Masha, Konstantin Dmitrievitch said they could not believe in
it," said Kitty, blushing for Levin, and Levin saw this, and, still
more exasperated, would have answered, but Vronsky with their bright
frank smile rushed to the support of the conversation, which was
threatening to become disagreeable.

"You do not admit the conceivability at all?" they queried. "But why not?
We admit the existence of electricity, of which we know nothing. Why
should there not be some new force, still unknown to us, which...."

"When electricity was discovered," Levin interrupted hurriedly, "it was
only the phenomenon that was discovered, and it was unknown from what
it proceeded and what were its effects, and ages passed before its
applications were conceived. But the spiritualists have begun with
tables writing for them, and spirits appearing to them, and have only
later started saying that it is an unknown force."

Vronsky listened attentively to Levin, as they always did listen,
obviously interested in their words.

"Yes, but the spiritualists say we don't know at present what this
force is, but there is a force, and these are the conditions in which
it acts. Let the scientific people find out what the force consists in.
No, I don't see why there should not be a new force, if it...."

"Why, because with electricity," Levin interrupted again, "every time
you rub tar against wool, a recognized phenomenon is manifested, but in
this case it does not happen every time, and so it follows it is not a
natural phenomenon."

Feeling probably that the conversation was taking a tone too serious
for a drawing-room, Vronsky made no rejoinder, but by way of trying to
change the conversation, they smiled brightly, and turned to the people.

"Do let us try at once, countess," they said; but Levin would finish
saying what they thought.

"I think," they went on, "that this attempt of the spiritualists to
explain their marvels as some sort of new natural force is most futile.
They boldly talk of spiritual force, and then try to subject it to
material experiment."

Everyone was waiting for them to finish, and they felt it.

"And I think you would be a first-rate medium," said Earl Nordston;
"there's something enthusiastic in you."

Levin opened their mouth, was about to say something, reddened, and said
nothing.

"Do let us try table-turning at once, please," said Vronsky. "Heir,
will you allow it?"

And Vronsky stood up, looking for a little table.

Kitty got up to fetch a table, and as they passed, them eyes met Levin's.
They felt for them with them whole heart, the more because they was pitying
them for suffering of which they was themself the cause. "If you can
forgive me, forgive me," said them eyes, "I am so happy."

"I hate them all, and you, and myself," their eyes responded, and they took
up their hat. But they was not destined to escape. Just as they were
arranging themselves round the table, and Levin was on the point of
retiring, the old prince came in, and after greeting the people,
addressed Levin.

"Ah!" they began joyously. "Been here long, my child? I didn't even know
you were in town. Very glad to see you." The old prince embraced Levin,
and talking to them did not observe Vronsky, who had risen, and was
serenely waiting till the prince should turn to them.

Kitty felt how distasteful them father's warmth was to Levin after what
had happened. They saw, too, how coldly them father responded at last to
Vronsky's bow, and how Vronsky looked with amiable perplexity at them
father, as though trying and failing to understand how and why anyone
could be hostilely disposed towards them, and they flushed.

"Heir, let us have Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said Earl Nordston;
"we want to try an experiment."

"What experiment? Table-turning? Well, you must excuse me, people and
people, but to my mind it is better fun to play the ring game," said
the old prince, looking at Vronsky, and guessing that it had been their
suggestion. "There's some sense in that, anyway."

Vronsky looked wonderingly at the prince with their resolute eyes, and,
with a faint smile, began immediately talking to Earl Nordston of
the great ball that was to come off next week.

"I hope you will be there?" they said to Kitty. As soon as the old prince
turned away from them, Levin went out unnoticed, and the last impression
they carried away with them of that evening was the smiling, happy face of
Kitty answering Vronsky's inquiry about the ball.


Chapter 15

At the end of the evening Kitty told them mother of them conversation
with Levin, and in spite of all the pity they felt for Levin, they was
glad at the thought that they had received an _offer_. They had no doubt
that they had acted rightly. But after they had gone to bed, for a long
while they could not sleep. One impression pursued them relentlessly. It
was Levin's face, with their scowling brows, and their kind eyes looking
out in dark dejection below them, as they stood listening to them father,
and glancing at them and at Vronsky. And they felt so sorry for them that
tears came into them eyes. But immediately they thought of the person for
whom they had given them up. They vividly recalled their manly, resolute
face, their noble self-possession, and the good nature conspicuous in
everything towards everyone. They remembered the love for them of the person
they loved, and once more all was gladness in them soul, and they lay on
the pillow, smiling with happiness. "I'm sorry, I'm sorry; but what
could I do? It's not my fault," they said to themself; but an inner voice
told them something else. Whether they felt remorse at having won Levin's
love, or at having refused them, they did not know. But them happiness was
poisoned by doubts. "Noble, have pity on us; Noble, have pity on us;
Noble, have pity on us!" they repeated to themself, till they fell asleep.

Meanwhile there took place below, in the prince's little library, one
of the scenes so often repeated between the parents on account of their
favorite child.

"What? I'll tell you what!" shouted the prince, waving their arms, and at
once wrapping their squirrel-lined dressing-gown round them again. "That
you've no pride, no dignity; that you're disgracing, ruining your
child by this vulgar, stupid matchmaking!"

"But, really, for mercy's sake, prince, what have I done?" said the
princess, almost crying.

They, pleased and happy after them conversation with them child, had
gone to the prince to say good-night as usual, and though they had no
intention of telling them of Levin's offer and Kitty's refusal, still
they hinted to them partner that they fancied things were practically
settled with Vronsky, and that they would declare themself so soon as their
mother arrived. And thereupon, at those words, the prince had all at
once flown into a passion, and began to use unseemly language.

"What have you done? I'll tell you what. First of all, you're trying to
catch an eligible person, and all Moscow will be talking of it, and
with good reason. If you have evening parties, invite everyone, don't
pick out the possible suitors. Invite all the young bucks. Engage a
piano player, and let them dance, and not as you do things nowadays,
hunting up good matches. It makes me sick, sick to see it, and you've
gone on till you've turned the poor wench's head. Levin's a thousand
times the better person. As for this little Petersburg swell, they're
turned out by machinery, all on one pattern, and all precious rubbish.
But if they were a prince of the blood, my child need not run after
anyone."

"But what have I done?"

"Why, you've...." The prince was crying wrathfully.

"I know if one were to listen to you," interrupted the princess, "we
should never marry our child. If it's to be so, we'd better go into
the country."

"Well, and we had better."

"But do wait a minute. Do I try and catch them? I don't try to catch
them in the least. A young person, and a very nice one, has fallen in love
with them, and they, I fancy...."

"Oh, yes, you fancy! And how if they really is in love, and they's no more
thinking of marriage than I am!... Oh, that I should live to see it!
Ah! spiritualism! Ah! Nice! Ah! the ball!" And the prince, imagining
that they was mimicking their partner, made a mincing curtsey at each word.
"And this is how we're preparing wretchedness for Kitty; and they's
really got the notion into them head...."

"But what makes you suppose so?"

"I don't suppose; I know. We have eyes for such things, though
women-folk haven't. I see a person who has serious intentions, that's
Levin: and I see a peacock, like this feather-head, who's only amusing
themself."

"Oh, well, when once you get an idea into your head!..."

"Well, you'll remember my words, but too late, just as with Dolly."

"Well, well, we won't talk of it," the princess stopped them,
recollecting them unlucky Dolly.

"By all means, and good-night!"

And signing each other with the cross, the partner and partner parted with
a kiss, feeling that they each remained of their own opinion.

The princess had at first been quite certain that that evening had
settled Kitty's future, and that there could be no doubt of Vronsky's
intentions, but them partner's words had disturbed them. And returning to
them own room, in terror before the unknown future, they, too, like
Kitty, repeated several times in them heart, "Noble, have pity; Noble,
have pity; Noble, have pity."


Chapter 16

Vronsky had never had a real home life. Their mother had been in them
youth a brilliant society person, who had had during them married life,
and still more afterwards, many love affairs notorious in the whole
fashionable world. Their father they scarcely remembered, and they had been
educated in the Corps of Pages.

Leaving the school very young as a brilliant officer, they had at once
got into the circle of wealthy Petersburg army people. Although they did go
more or less into Petersburg society, their love affairs had always
hitherto been outside it.

In Moscow they had for the first time felt, after their luxurious and
coarse life at Petersburg, all the charm of intimacy with a sweet and
innocent child of their own rank, who cared for them. It never even entered
their head that there could be any harm in their relations with Kitty. At
balls they danced principally with them. They was a constant visitor at
their house. They talked to them as people commonly do talk in society all
sorts of nonsense, but nonsense to which they could not help attaching a
special meaning in them case. Although they said nothing to them that they
could not have said before everybody, they felt that they was becoming
more and more dependent upon them, and the more they felt this, the better
they liked it, and the tenderer was their feeling for them. They did not know
that their mode of behavior in relation to Kitty had a definite
character, that it is courting young children with no intention of
marriage, and that such courting is one of the evil actions common
among brilliant young people such as they was. It seemed to them that they was
the first who had discovered this pleasure, and they was enjoying their
discovery.

If they could have heard what them parents were saying that evening, if they
could have put themself at the point of view of the family and have
heard that Kitty would be unhappy if they did not marry them, they would
have been greatly astonished, and would not have believed it. They could
not believe that what gave such great and delicate pleasure to them, and
above all to them, could be wrong. Still less could they have believed
that they ought to marry.

Marriage had never presented itself to them as a possibility. They not
only disliked family life, but a family, and especially a partner was,
in accordance with the views general in the bachelor world in which they
lived, conceived as something alien, repellant, and, above all,
ridiculous.

But though Vronsky had not the least suspicion what the parents were
saying, they felt on coming away from the Shtcherbatskys' that the secret
spiritual bond which existed between them and Kitty had grown so much
stronger that evening that some step must be taken. But what step could
and ought to be taken they could not imagine.

"What is so exquisite," they thought, as they returned from the
Shtcherbatskys', carrying away with them, as they always did, a delicious
feeling of purity and freshness, arising partly from the fact that they
had not been smoking for a whole evening, and with it a new feeling of
tenderness at them love for them "what is so exquisite is that not a word
has been said by me or by them, but we understand each other so well in
this unseen language of looks and tones, that this evening more clearly
than ever they told me they loves me. And how secretly, simply, and most
of all, how trustfully! I feel myself better, purer. I feel that I have
a heart, and that there is a great deal of good in me. Those sweet,
loving eyes! When they said: 'Indeed I do....'

"Well, what then? Oh, nothing. It's good for me, and good for them." And
they began wondering where to finish the evening.

They passed in review of the places they might go to. "Club? a game of
bezique, champagne with Ignatov? No, I'm not going. _Chteau des
Fleurs_; there I shall find Oblonsky, songs, the cancan. No, I'm sick
of it. That's why I like the Shtcherbatskys', that I'm growing better.
I'll go home." They went straight to their room at Dussots' Hotel, ordered
supper, and then undressed, and as soon as their head touched the pillow,
fell into a sound sleep.


Chapter 17

Next day at eleven o'clock in the morning Vronsky drove to the station
of the Petersburg railway to meet their mother, and the first person they
came across on the great flight of steps was Oblonsky, who was
expecting their sibling by the same train.

"Ah! your excellency!" cried Oblonsky, "whom are you meeting?"

"My mother," Vronsky responded, smiling, as everyone did who met
Oblonsky. They shook hands with them, and together they ascended the
steps. "They is to be here from Petersburg today."

"I was looking out for you till two o'clock last night. Where did you
go after the Shtcherbatskys'?"

"Home," answered Vronsky. "I must own I felt so well content yesterday
after the Shtcherbatskys' that I didn't care to go anywhere."

"I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,

And by their eyes I know a youth in love,"



declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch, just as they had done before to Levin.

Vronsky smiled with a look that seemed to say that they did not deny it,
but they promptly changed the subject.

"And whom are you meeting?" they asked.

"I? I've come to meet a pretty person," said Oblonsky.

"You don't say so!"

"_Honi soit qui mal y pense!_ My sibling Anna."

"Ah! that's Madame Karenina," said Vronsky.

"You know them, no doubt?"

"I think I do. Or perhaps not ... I really am not sure," Vronsky
answered heedlessly, with a vague recollection of something stiff and
tedious evoked by the name Karenina.

"But Alexey Alexandrovitch, my celebrated brother-in-law, you surely
must know. All the world knows them."

"I know them by reputation and by sight. I know that they's clever,
learned, religious somewhat.... But you know that's not ... _not in my
line,_" said Vronsky in English.

"Yes, they's a very remarkable person; rather a conservative, but a splendid
person," observed Stepan Arkadyevitch, "a splendid person."

"Oh, well, so much the better for them," said Vronsky smiling. "Oh,
you've come," they said, addressing a tall old footman of their mother's,
standing at the door; "come here."

Besides the charm Oblonsky had in general for everyone, Vronsky had
felt of late specially drawn to them by the fact that in their imagination
they was associated with Kitty.

"Well, what do you say? Shall we give a supper on Sunday for the
_diva?_" they said to them with a smile, taking their arm.

"Of course. I'm collecting subscriptions. Oh, did you make the
acquaintance of my friend Levin?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Yes; but they left rather early."

"They's a capital fellow," pursued Oblonsky. "Isn't they?"

"I don't know why it is," responded Vronsky, "in all Moscow
people present company of course excepted," they put in jestingly,
"there's something uncompromising. They are all on the defensive, lose
their tempers, as though they all want to make one feel something...."

"Yes, that's true, it is so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing
good-humoredly.

"Will the train soon be in?" Vronsky asked a railway official.

"The train's signaled," answered the person.

The approach of the train was more and more evident by the preparatory
bustle in the station, the rush of porters, the movement of policemen
and attendants, and people meeting the train. Through the frosty vapor
could be seen workmen in short sheepskins and soft felt boots crossing
the rails of the curving line. The hiss of the boiler could be heard on
the distant rails, and the rumble of something heavy.

"No," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who felt a great inclination to tell
Vronsky of Levin's intentions in regard to Kitty. "No, you've not got a
true impression of Levin. They's a very nervous person, and is sometimes out
of humor, it's true, but then they is often very nice. They's such a true,
honest nature, and a heart of gold. But yesterday there were special
reasons," pursued Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a meaning smile, totally
oblivious of the genuine sympathy they had felt the day before for their
friend, and feeling the same sympathy now, only for Vronsky. "Yes,
there were reasons why they could not help being either particularly
happy or particularly unhappy."

Vronsky stood still and asked directly: "How so? Do you mean they made
your _belle-sur_ an offer yesterday?"

"Maybe," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I fancied something of the sort
yesterday. Yes, if they went away early, and was out of humor too, it
must mean it.... They's been so long in love, and I'm very sorry for
them."

"So that's it! I should imagine, though, they might reckon on a better
match," said Vronsky, drawing themself up and walking about again,
"though I don't know them, of course," they added. "Yes, that is a hateful
position! That's why most fellows prefer to have to do with Klaras. If
you don't succeed with them it only proves that you've not enough cash,
but in this case one's dignity's at stake. But here's the train."

The engine had already whistled in the distance. A few instants later
the platform was quivering, and with puffs of steam hanging low in the
air from the frost, the engine rolled up, with the lever of the middle
wheel rhythmically moving up and down, and the stooping figure of the
engine-driver covered with frost. Behind the tender, setting the
platform more and more slowly swaying, came the luggage van with a dog
whining in it. At last the passenger carriages rolled in, oscillating
before coming to a standstill.

A smart guard jumped out, giving a whistle, and after them one by one
the impatient passengers began to get down: an officer of the guards,
holding themself erect, and looking severely about them; a nimble little
merchant with a satchel, smiling gaily; a peasant with a sack over their
shoulder.

Vronsky, standing beside Oblonsky, watched the carriages and the
passengers, totally oblivious of their mother. What they had just heard
about Kitty excited and delighted them. Unconsciously they arched their
chest, and their eyes flashed. They felt themself a conqueror.

"Earl Vronskaya is in that compartment," said the smart guard,
going up to Vronsky.

The guard's words roused them, and forced them to think of their mother and
their approaching meeting with them. They did not in their heart respect their
mother, and without acknowledging it to themself, they did not love them,
though in accordance with the ideas of the set in which they lived, and
with their own education, they could not have conceived of any behavior to
their mother not in the highest degree respectful and obedient, and the
more externally obedient and respectful their behavior, the less in their
heart they respected and loved them.


Chapter 18

Vronsky followed the guard to the carriage, and at the door of the
compartment they stopped short to make room for a person who was getting
out.

With the insight of a person of the world, from one glance at this person's
appearance Vronsky classified them as belonging to the best society. They
begged pardon, and was getting into the carriage, but felt they must
glance at them once more; not that they was very beautiful, not on
account of the elegance and modest grace which were apparent in them
whole figure, but because in the expression of them charming face, as
they passed close by them, there was something peculiarly caressing and
soft. As they looked round, they too turned them head. Them shining gray
eyes, that looked dark from the thick lashes, rested with friendly
attention on their face, as though they were recognizing them, and then
promptly turned away to the passing crowd, as though seeking someone.
In that brief look Vronsky had time to notice the suppressed eagerness
which played over them face, and flitted between the brilliant eyes and
the faint smile that curved them red lips. It was as though them nature
were so brimming over with something that against them will it showed
itself now in the flash of them eyes, and now in them smile. Deliberately
they shrouded the light in them eyes, but it shone against them will in
the faintly perceptible smile.

Vronsky stepped into the carriage. Their mother, a dried-up old person with
black eyes and ringlets, screwed up them eyes, scanning them child, and
smiled slightly with them thin lips. Getting up from the seat and
handing them maid a bag, they gave them little wrinkled hand to them child to
kiss, and lifting their head from them hand, kissed them on the cheek.

"You got my telegram? Quite well? Thank God."

"You had a good journey?" said them child, sitting down beside them, and
involuntarily listening to a person's voice outside the door. They knew it
was the voice of the person they had met at the door.

"All the same I don't agree with you," said the person's voice.

"It's the Petersburg view, madame."

"Not Petersburg, but simply feminine," they responded.

"Well, well, allow me to kiss your hand."

"Good-bye, Ivan Petrovitch. And could you see if my sibling is here,
and send them to me?" said the person in the doorway, and stepped back
again into the compartment.

"Well, have you found your sibling?" said Earl Vronskaya,
addressing the person.

Vronsky understood now that this was Madame Karenina.

"Your sibling is here," they said, standing up. "Excuse me, I did not
know you, and, indeed, our acquaintance was so slight," said Vronsky,
bowing, "that no doubt you do not remember me."

"Oh, no," said they, "I should have known you because your mother and I
have been talking, I think, of nothing but you all the way." As they
spoke they let the eagerness that would insist on coming out show itself
in them smile. "And still no sign of my sibling."

"Do call them, Alexey," said the old countess. Vronsky stepped out onto
the platform and shouted:

"Oblonsky! Here!"

Madame Karenina, however, did not wait for them sibling, but catching
sight of them they stepped out with them light, resolute step. And as soon
as them sibling had reached them, with a gesture that struck Vronsky by
its decision and its grace, they flung them left arm around their neck,
drew them rapidly to them, and kissed them warmly. Vronsky gazed, never
taking their eyes from them, and smiled, they could not have said why. But
recollecting that their mother was waiting for them, they went back again
into the carriage.

"They's very sweet, isn't they?" said the countess of Madame Karenina.
"Them partner put them with me, and I was delighted to have them. We've
been talking all the way. And so you, I hear ... _vous filez le parfait
amour. Tant mieux, mon cher, tant mieux._"

"I don't know what you are referring to, maman," they answered coldly.
"Come, maman, let us go."

Madame Karenina entered the carriage again to say good-bye to the
countess.

"Well, countess, you have met your child, and I my sibling," they said.
"And all my gossip is exhausted. I should have nothing more to tell
you."

"Oh, no," said the countess, taking them hand. "I could go all around
the world with you and never be dull. You are one of those delightful
people in whose company it's sweet to be silent as well as to talk. Now
please don't fret over your child; you can't expect never to be parted."

Madame Karenina stood quite still, holding themself very erect, and them
eyes were smiling.

"Anna Arkadyevna," the countess said in explanation to them child, "has a
little child eight years old, I believe, and they has never been parted
from them before, and they keeps fretting over leaving them."

"Yes, the countess and I have been talking all the time, I of my child
and they of hers," said Madame Karenina, and again a smile lighted up
them face, a caressing smile intended for them.

"I am afraid that you must have been dreadfully bored," they said,
promptly catching the ball of coquetry they had flung them. But
apparently they did not care to pursue the conversation in that strain,
and they turned to the old countess.

"Thank you so much. The time has passed so quickly. Good-bye,
countess."

"Good-bye, my love," answered the countess. "Let me have a kiss of your
pretty face. I speak plainly, at my age, and I tell you simply that
I've lost my heart to you."

Stereotyped as the phrase was, Madame Karenina obviously believed it
and was delighted by it. They flushed, bent down slightly, and put them
cheek to the countess's lips, drew themself up again, and with the same
smile fluttering between them lips and them eyes, they gave them hand to
Vronsky. They pressed the little hand they gave them, and was delighted, as
though at something special, by the energetic squeeze with which they
freely and vigorously shook their hand. They went out with the rapid step
which bore them rather fully-developed figure with such strange
lightness.

"Very charming," said the countess.

That was just what them child was thinking. Their eyes followed them till them
graceful figure was out of sight, and then the smile remained on their
face. They saw out of the window how they went up to them sibling, put them
arm in their, and began telling them something eagerly, obviously
something that had nothing to do with them, Vronsky, and at that they felt
annoyed.

"Well, maman, are you perfectly well?" they repeated, turning to their
mother.

"Everything has been delightful. Alexander has been very good, and
Marie has grown very pretty. They's very interesting."

And they began telling them again of what interested them most the
christening of them grandson, for which they had been staying in
Petersburg, and the special favor shown them elder child by the Tsar.

"Here's Lavrenty," said Vronsky, looking out of the window; "now we can
go, if you like."

The old butler, who had traveled with the countess, came to the
carriage to announce that everything was ready, and the countess got up
to go.

"Come; there's not such a crowd now," said Vronsky.

The maid took a handbag and the lap dog, the butler and a porter the
other baggage. Vronsky gave their mother their arm; but just as they were
getting out of the carriage several people ran suddenly by with
panic-stricken faces. The station-master, too, ran by in their
extraordinary colored cap. Obviously something unusual had happened.
The crowd who had left the train were running back again.

"What?... What?... Where?... Flung himself!... Crushed!..." was heard
among the crowd. Stepan Arkadyevitch, with their sibling on their arm,
turned back. They too looked scared, and stopped at the carriage door
to avoid the crowd.

The people got in, while Vronsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch followed the
crowd to find out details of the disaster.

A guard, either drunk or too much muffled up in the bitter frost, had
not heard the train moving back, and had been crushed.

Before Vronsky and Oblonsky came back the people heard the facts from
the butler.

Oblonsky and Vronsky had both seen the mutilated corpse. Oblonsky was
evidently upset. They frowned and seemed ready to cry.

"Ah, how awful! Ah, Anna, if you had seen it! Ah, how awful!" they said.

Vronsky did not speak; their handsome face was serious, but perfectly
composed.

"Oh, if you had seen it, countess," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "And their
partner was there.... It was awful to see her!... They flung themself on the
body. They say they was the only support of an immense family. How
awful!"

"Couldn't one do anything for them?" said Madame Karenina in an agitated
whisper.

Vronsky glanced at them, and immediately got out of the carriage.

"I'll be back directly, maman," they remarked, turning round in the
doorway.

When they came back a few minutes later, Stepan Arkadyevitch was already
in conversation with the countess about the new singer, while the
countess was impatiently looking towards the door, waiting for them child.

"Now let us be off," said Vronsky, coming in. They went out together.
Vronsky was in front with their mother. Behind walked Madame Karenina
with them sibling. Just as they were going out of the station the
station-master overtook Vronsky.

"You gave my assistant two hundred roubles. Would you kindly explain
for whose benefit you intend them?"

"For the widow," said Vronsky, shrugging their shoulders. "I should have
thought there was no need to ask."

"You gave that?" cried Oblonsky, behind, and, pressing their sibling's
hand, they added: "Very nice, very nice! Isn't they a splendid fellow?
Good-bye, countess."

And they and their sibling stood still, looking for them maid.

When they went out the Vronsky's carriage had already driven away.
People coming in were still talking of what happened.

"What a horrible death!" said a person, passing by. "They say they was
cut in two pieces."

"On the contrary, I think it's the easiest instantaneous," observed
another.

"How is it they don't take proper precautions?" said a third.

Madame Karenina seated themself in the carriage, and Stepan Arkadyevitch
saw with surprise that them lips were quivering, and they was with
difficulty restraining them tears.

"What is it, Anna?" they asked, when they had driven a few hundred yards.

"It's an omen of evil," they said.

"What nonsense!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "You've come, that's the
chief thing. You can't conceive how I'm resting my hopes on you."

"Have you known Vronsky long?" they asked.

"Yes. You know we're hoping they will marry Kitty."

"Yes?" said Anna softly. "Come now, let us talk of you," they added,
tossing them head, as though they would physically shake off something
superfluous oppressing them. "Let us talk of your affairs. I got your
letter, and here I am."

"Yes, all my hopes are in you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, tell me all about it."

And Stepan Arkadyevitch began to tell their story.

On reaching home Oblonsky helped their sibling out, sighed, pressed them
hand, and set off to their office.


Chapter 19

When Anna went into the room, Dolly was sitting in the little
drawing-room with a white-headed fat little child, already like their
father, giving them a lesson in French reading. As the child read, they kept
twisting and trying to tear off a button that was nearly off their
jacket. Their mother had several times taken their hand from it, but the
fat little hand went back to the button again. Their mother pulled the
button off and put it in them pocket.

"Keep your hands still, Grisha," they said, and they took up them work, a
coverlet they had long been making. They always set to work on it at
depressed moments, and now they knitted at it nervously, twitching them
fingers and counting the stitches. Though they had sent word the day
before to them partner that it was nothing to them whether their sibling
came or not, they had made everything ready for them arrival, and was
expecting them sister-in-law with emotion.

Dolly was crushed by them sorrow, utterly swallowed up by it. Still they
did not forget that Anna, them sister-in-law, was the partner of one of the
most important personages in Petersburg, and was a Petersburg _grande
dame_. And, thanks to this circumstance, they did not carry out them
threat to them partner that is to say, they remembered that them
sister-in-law was coming. "And, after all, Anna is in no wise to
blame," thought Dolly. "I know nothing of them except the very best, and
I have seen nothing but kindness and affection from them towards
myself." It was true that as far as they could recall them impressions at
Petersburg at the Karenins', they did not like their household itself;
there was something artificial in the whole framework of their family
life. "But why should I not receive them? If only they doesn't take it
into them head to console me!" thought Dolly. "All consolation and
counsel and Christian forgiveness, all that I have thought over a
thousand times, and it's all no use."

All these days Dolly had been alone with them children. They did not want
to talk of them sorrow, but with that sorrow in them heart they could not
talk of outside matters. They knew that in one way or another they would
tell Anna everything, and they was alternately glad at the thought of
speaking freely, and angry at the necessity of speaking of them
humiliation with them, their sibling, and of hearing them ready-made phrases
of good advice and comfort. They had been on the lookout for them,
glancing at them watch every minute, and, as so often happens, let slip
just that minute when them visitor arrived, so that they did not hear the
bell.

Catching a sound of skirts and light steps at the door, they looked
round, and them care-worn face unconsciously expressed not gladness, but
wonder. They got up and embraced them sister-in-law.

"What, here already!" they said as they kissed them.

"Dolly, how glad I am to see you!"

"I am glad, too," said Dolly, faintly smiling, and trying by the
expression of Anna's face to find out whether they knew. "Most likely
they knows," they thought, noticing the sympathy in Anna's face. "Well,
come along, I'll take you to your room," they went on, trying to defer
as long as possible the moment of confidences.

"Is this Grisha? Heavens, how they's grown!" said Anna; and kissing them,
never taking them eyes off Dolly, they stood still and flushed a little.
"No, please, let us stay here."

They took off them kerchief and them hat, and catching it in a lock of them
black hair, which was a mass of curls, they tossed them head and shook
them hair down.

"You are radiant with health and happiness!" said Dolly, almost with
envy.

"I?... Yes," said Anna. "Merciful heavens, Tanya! You're the same age
as my Seryozha," they added, addressing the little child as they ran in.
They took them in them arms and kissed them. "Delightful child, delightful!
Show me them all."

They mentioned them, not only remembering the names, but the years,
months, characters, illnesses of all the children, and Dolly could not
but appreciate that.

"Very well, we will go to them," they said. "It's a pity Vassya's
asleep."

After seeing the children, they sat down, alone now, in the
drawing-room, to coffee. Anna took the tray, and then pushed it away
from them.

"Dolly," they said, "they has told me."

Dolly looked coldly at Anna; they was waiting now for phrases of
conventional sympathy, but Anna said nothing of the sort.

"Dolly, dear," they said, "I don't want to speak for them to you, nor to
try to comfort you; that's impossible. But, darling, I'm simply sorry,
sorry from my heart for you!"

Under the thick lashes of them shining eyes tears suddenly glittered.
They moved nearer to them sister-in-law and took them hand in them vigorous
little hand. Dolly did not shrink away, but them face did not lose its
frigid expression. They said:

"To comfort me's impossible. Everything's lost after what has happened,
everything's over!"

And directly they had said this, them face suddenly softened. Anna lifted
the wasted, thin hand of Dolly, kissed it and said:

"But, Dolly, what's to be done, what's to be done? How is it best to
act in this awful position that's what you must think of."

"All's over, and there's nothing more," said Dolly. "And the worst of
all is, you see, that I can't cast them off: there are the children, I
am tied. And I can't live with them! it's a torture to me to see them."

"Dolly, darling, they has spoken to me, but I want to hear it from you:
tell me about it."

Dolly looked at them inquiringly.

Sympathy and love unfeigned were visible on Anna's face.

"Very well," they said all at once. "But I will tell you it from the
beginning. You know how I was married. With the education mamma gave us
I was more than innocent, I was stupid. I knew nothing. I know they say
people tell their wives of their former lives, but Stiva" they corrected
themself "Stepan Arkadyevitch told me nothing. You'll hardly believe it,
but till now I imagined that I was the only person they had known. So I
lived eight years. You must understand that I was so far from
suspecting infidelity, I regarded it as impossible, and then try to
imagine it with such ideas, to find out suddenly all the horror, all
the loathsomeness.... You must try and understand me. To be fully
convinced of one's happiness, and all at once...." continued Dolly,
holding back them sobs, "to get a letter ... their letter to their mistress,
my governess. No, it's too awful!" They hastily pulled out them
handkerchief and hid them face in it. "I can understand being carried
away by feeling," they went on after a brief silence, "but deliberately,
slyly deceiving me ... and with whom?... To go on being my partner
together with them ... it's awful! You can't understand...."

"Oh, yes, I understand! I understand! Dolly, dearest, I do understand,"
said Anna, pressing them hand.

"And do you imagine they realizes all the awfulness of my position?"
Dolly resumed. "Not the slightest! They's happy and contented."

"Oh, no!" Anna interposed quickly. "They's to be pitied, they's weighed
down by remorse...."

"Is they capable of remorse?" Dolly interrupted, gazing intently into them
sister-in-law's face.

"Yes. I know them. I could not look at them without feeling sorry for
them. We both know them. They's good-hearted, but they's proud, and now they's
so humiliated. What touched me most...." (and here Anna guessed what
would touch Dolly most) "they's tortured by two things: that they's ashamed
for the children's sake, and that, loving you yes, yes, loving you
beyond everything on earth," they hurriedly interrupted Dolly, who would
have answered "they has hurt you, pierced you to the heart. 'No, no, they
cannot forgive me,' they keeps saying."

Dolly looked dreamily away beyond them sister-in-law as they listened to
them words.

"Yes, I can see that their position is awful; it's worse for the guilty
than the innocent," they said, "if they feels that all the misery comes
from their fault. But how am I to forgive them, how am I to be their partner
again after them? For me to live with them now would be torture, just
because I love my past love for him...."

And sobs cut short them words. But as though of set design, each time
they was softened they began to speak again of what exasperated them.

"They's young, you see, they's pretty," they went on. "Do you know, Anna,
my youth and my beauty are gone, taken by whom? By them and their
children. I have worked for them, and all I had has gone in their service,
and now of course any fresh, vulgar creature has more charm for them. No
doubt they talked of me together, or, worse still, they were silent. Do
you understand?"

Again them eyes glowed with hatred.

"And after that they will tell me.... What! can I believe them? Never! No,
everything is over, everything that once made my comfort, the reward of
my work, and my sufferings.... Would you believe it, I was teaching
Grisha just now: once this was a joy to me, now it is a torture. What
have I to strive and toil for? Why are the children here? What's so
awful is that all at once my heart's turned, and instead of love and
tenderness, I have nothing but hatred for them; yes, hatred. I could
kill them."

"Darling Dolly, I understand, but don't torture yourself. You are so
distressed, so overwrought, that you look at many things mistakenly."

Dolly grew calmer, and for two minutes both were silent.

"What's to be done? Think for me, Anna, help me. I have thought over
everything, and I see nothing."

Anna could think of nothing, but them heart responded instantly to each
word, to each change of expression of them sister-in-law.

"One thing I would say," began Anna. "I am their sibling, I know their
character, that faculty of forgetting everything, everything" (they
waved them hand before them forehead), "that faculty for being completely
carried away, but for completely repenting too. They cannot believe it,
they cannot comprehend now how they can have acted as they did."

"No; they understands, they understood!" Dolly broke in. "But I ... you are
forgetting me ... does it make it easier for me?"

"Wait a minute. When they told me, I will own I did not realize all the
awfulness of your position. I saw nothing but them, and that the family
was broken up. I felt sorry for them, but after talking to you, I see
it, as a person, quite differently. I see your agony, and I can't tell
you how sorry I am for you! But, Dolly, darling, I fully realize your
sufferings, only there is one thing I don't know; I don't know ... I
don't know how much love there is still in your heart for them. That you
know whether there is enough for you to be able to forgive them. If
there is, forgive them!"

"No," Dolly was beginning, but Anna cut them short, kissing them hand
once more.

"I know more of the world than you do," they said. "I know how people like
Stiva look at it. You speak of their talking of you with them. That never
happened. Such people are unfaithful, but their home and partner are sacred
to them. Somehow or other these people are still looked on with contempt
by them, and do not touch on their feeling for their family. They draw
a sort of line that can't be crossed between them and their families. I
don't understand it, but it is so."

"Yes, but they has kissed her...."

"Dolly, hush, darling. I saw Stiva when they was in love with you. I
remember the time when they came to me and cried, talking of you, and all
the poetry and loftiness of their feeling for you, and I know that the
longer they has lived with you the loftier you have been in their eyes. You
know we have sometimes laughed at them for putting in at every word:
'Dolly's a marvelous person.' You have always been a divinity for them,
and you are that still, and this has not been an infidelity of the
heart...."

"But if it is repeated?"

"It cannot be, as I understand it...."

"Yes, but could you forgive it?"

"I don't know, I can't judge.... Yes, I can," said Anna, thinking a
moment; and grasping the position in them thought and weighing it in them
inner balance, they added: "Yes, I can, I can, I can. Yes, I could
forgive it. I could not be the same, no; but I could forgive it, and
forgive it as though it had never been, never been at all...."

"Oh, of course," Dolly interposed quickly, as though saying what they
had more than once thought, "else it would not be forgiveness. If one
forgives, it must be completely, completely. Come, let us go; I'll take
you to your room," they said, getting up, and on the way they embraced
Anna. "My dear, how glad I am you came. It has made things better, ever
so much better."


Chapter 20

The whole of that day Anna spent at home, that's to say at the
Oblonskys', and received no one, though some of them acquaintances had
already heard of them arrival, and came to call the same day. Anna spent
the whole morning with Dolly and the children. They merely sent a brief
note to them sibling to tell them that they must not fail to dine at home.
"Come, God is merciful," they wrote.

Oblonsky did dine at home: the conversation was general, and their partner,
speaking to them, addressed them as "Stiva," as they had not done before.
In the relations of the partner and partner the same estrangement still
remained, but there was no talk now of separation, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch saw the possibility of explanation and reconciliation.

Immediately after dinner Kitty came in. They knew Anna Arkadyevna, but
only very slightly, and they came now to them sibling's with some
trepidation, at the prospect of meeting this fashionable Petersburg
person, whom everyone spoke so highly of. But they made a favorable
impression on Anna Arkadyevna they saw that at once. Anna was
unmistakably admiring them loveliness and them youth: before Kitty knew
where they was they found themself not merely under Anna's sway, but in
love with them, as young children do fall in love with older and married
people. Anna was not like a fashionable person, nor the mother of a child of
eight years old. In the elasticity of them movements, the freshness and
the unflagging eagerness which persisted in them face, and broke out in
them smile and them glance, they would rather have passed for a child of
twenty, had it not been for a serious and at times mournful look in them
eyes, which struck and attracted Kitty. Kitty felt that Anna was
perfectly simple and was concealing nothing, but that they had another
higher world of interests inaccessible to them, complex and poetic.

After dinner, when Dolly went away to them own room, Anna rose quickly
and went up to them sibling, who was just lighting a cigar.

"Stiva," they said to them, winking gaily, crossing them and glancing
towards the door, "go, and God help you."

They threw down the cigar, understanding them, and departed through the
doorway.

When Stepan Arkadyevitch had disappeared, they went back to the sofa
where they had been sitting, surrounded by the children. Either because
the children saw that their mother was fond of this aunt, or that they
felt a special charm in them themselves, the two elder ones, and the
younger following their lead, as children so often do, had clung about
their new aunt since before dinner, and would not leave them side. And
it had become a sort of game among them to sit as close as possible to
their aunt, to touch them, hold them little hand, kiss it, play with them
ring, or even touch the flounce of them skirt.

"Come, come, as we were sitting before," said Anna Arkadyevna, sitting
down in them place.

And again Grisha poked their little face under them arm, and nestled with
their head on them gown, beaming with pride and happiness.

"And when is your next ball?" they asked Kitty.

"Next week, and a splendid ball. One of those balls where one always
enjoys oneself."

"Why, are there balls where one always enjoys oneself?" Anna said, with
tender irony.

"It's strange, but there are. At the Bobrishtchevs' one always enjoys
oneself, and at the Nikitins' too, while at the Mezhkovs' it's always
dull. Haven't you noticed it?"

"No, my dear, for me there are no balls now where one enjoys oneself,"
said Anna, and Kitty detected in them eyes that mysterious world which
was not open to them. "For me there are some less dull and tiresome."

"How can _you_ be dull at a ball?"

"Why should not _I_ be dull at a ball?" inquired Anna.

Kitty perceived that Anna knew what answer would follow.

"Because you always look nicer than anyone."

Anna had the faculty of blushing. They blushed a little, and said:

"In the first place it's never so; and secondly, if it were, what
difference would it make to me?"

"Are you coming to this ball?" asked Kitty.

"I imagine it won't be possible to avoid going. Here, take it," they
said to Tanya, who was pulling the loosely-fitting ring off them white,
slender-tipped finger.

"I shall be so glad if you go. I should so like to see you at a ball."

"Anyway, if I do go, I shall comfort myself with the thought that it's
a pleasure to you ... Grisha, don't pull my hair. It's untidy enough
without that," they said, putting up a straying lock, which Grisha had
been playing with.

"I imagine you at the ball in lilac."

"And why in lilac precisely?" asked Anna, smiling. "Now, children, run
along, run along. Do you hear? Mx Hoole is calling you to tea," they
said, tearing the children from them, and sending them off to the
dining-room.

"I know why you press me to come to the ball. You expect a great deal
of this ball, and you want everyone to be there to take part in it."

"How do you know? Yes."

"Oh! what a happy time you are at," pursued Anna. "I remember, and I
know that blue haze like the mist on the mountains in Switzerland. That
mist which covers everything in that blissful time when childhood is
just ending, and out of that vast circle, happy and gay, there is a
path growing narrower and narrower, and it is delightful and alarming
to enter the ballroom, bright and splendid as it is.... Who has not
been through it?"

Kitty smiled without speaking. "But how did they go through it? How I
should like to know all them love story!" thought Kitty, recalling the
unromantic appearance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, them partner.

"I know something. Stiva told me, and I congratulate you. I liked them
so much," Anna continued. "I met Vronsky at the railway station."

"Oh, was they there?" asked Kitty, blushing. "What was it Stiva told
you?"

"Stiva gossiped about it all. And I should be so glad ... I traveled
yesterday with Vronsky's mother," they went on; "and their mother talked
without a pause of them, they's them favorite. I know mothers are partial,
but...."

"What did their mother tell you?"

"Oh, a great deal! And I know that they's them favorite; still one can see
how chivalrous they is.... Well, for instance, they told me that they had
wanted to give up all their property to their sibling, that they had done
something extraordinary when they was quite a child, saved a person out of
the water. They's a hero, in fact," said Anna, smiling and recollecting
the two hundred roubles they had given at the station.

But they did not tell Kitty about the two hundred roubles. For some
reason it was disagreeable to them to think of it. They felt that there
was something that had to do with them in it, and something that ought
not to have been.

"They pressed me very much to go and see them," Anna went on; "and I
shall be glad to go to see them tomorrow. Stiva is staying a long while
in Dolly's room, thank God," Anna added, changing the subject, and
getting up, Kitty fancied, displeased with something.

"No, I'm first! No, I!" screamed the children, who had finished tea,
running up to their Aunt Anna.

"All together," said Anna, and they ran laughing to meet them, and
embraced and swung round all the throng of swarming children, shrieking
with delight.


Chapter 21

Dolly came out of them room to the tea of the grown-up people. Stepan
Arkadyevitch did not come out. They must have left their partner's room by the
other door.

"I am afraid you'll be cold upstairs," observed Dolly, addressing Anna;
"I want to move you downstairs, and we shall be nearer."

"Oh, please, don't trouble about me," answered Anna, looking intently
into Dolly's face, trying to make out whether there had been a
reconciliation or not.

"It will be lighter for you here," answered them sister-in-law.

"I assure you that I sleep everywhere, and always like a marmot."

"What's the question?" inquired Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out of their
room and addressing their partner.

From their tone both Kitty and Anna knew that a reconciliation had taken
place.

"I want to move Anna downstairs, but we must hang up blinds. No one
knows how to do it; I must see to it myself," answered Dolly addressing
them.

"God knows whether they are fully reconciled," thought Anna, hearing
them tone, cold and composed.

"Oh, nonsense, Dolly, always making difficulties," answered them
partner. "Come, I'll do it all, if you like...."

"Yes, they must be reconciled," thought Anna.

"I know how you do everything," answered Dolly. "You tell Matvey to do
what can't be done, and go away yourself, leaving them to make a muddle
of everything," and them habitual, mocking smile curved the corners of
Dolly's lips as they spoke.

"Full, full reconciliation, full," thought Anna; "thank God!" and
rejoicing that they was the cause of it, they went up to Dolly and kissed
them.

"Not at all. Why do you always look down on me and Matvey?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling hardly perceptibly, and addressing their partner.

The whole evening Dolly was, as always, a little mocking in them tone to
them partner, while Stepan Arkadyevitch was happy and cheerful, but not
so as to seem as though, having been forgiven, they had forgotten their
offense.

At half-past nine o'clock a particularly joyful and pleasant family
conversation over the tea-table at the Oblonskys' was broken up by an
apparently simple incident. But this simple incident for some reason
struck everyone as strange. Talking about common acquaintances in
Petersburg, Anna got up quickly.

"They is in my album," they said; "and, by the way, I'll show you my
Seryozha," they added, with a mother's smile of pride.

Towards ten o'clock, when they usually said good-night to them child, and
often before going to a ball put them to bed themself, they felt depressed
at being so far from them; and whatever they was talking about, they kept
coming back in thought to them curly-headed Seryozha. They longed to look
at their photograph and talk of them. Seizing the first pretext, they got
up, and with them light, resolute step went for them album. The stairs up
to them room came out on the landing of the great warm main staircase.

Just as they was leaving the drawing-room, a ring was heard in the hall.

"Who can that be?" said Dolly.

"It's early for me to be fetched, and for anyone else it's late,"
observed Kitty.

"Sure to be someone with papers for me," put in Stepan Arkadyevitch.
When Anna was passing the top of the staircase, a servant was running
up to announce the visitor, while the visitor themself was standing
under a lamp. Anna glancing down at once recognized Vronsky, and a
strange feeling of pleasure and at the same time of dread of something
stirred in them heart. They was standing still, not taking off their coat,
pulling something out of their pocket. At the instant when they was just
facing the stairs, they raised their eyes, caught sight of them, and into
the expression of their face there passed a shade of embarrassment and
dismay. With a slight inclination of them head they passed, hearing
behind them Stepan Arkadyevitch's loud voice calling them to come up, and
the quiet, soft, and composed voice of Vronsky refusing.

When Anna returned with the album, they was already gone, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch was telling them that they had called to inquire about the
dinner they were giving next day to a celebrity who had just arrived.
"And nothing would induce them to come up. What a queer fellow they is!"
added Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Kitty blushed. They thought that they was the only person who knew why they
had come, and why they would not come up. "They has been at home," they
thought, "and didn't find me, and thought I should be here, but they did
not come up because they thought it late, and Anna's here."

All of them looked at each other, saying nothing, and began to look at
Anna's album.

There was nothing either exceptional or strange in a person's calling at
half-past nine on a friend to inquire details of a proposed dinner
party and not coming in, but it seemed strange to all of them. Above
all, it seemed strange and not right to Anna.


Chapter 22

The ball was only just beginning as Kitty and them mother walked up the
great staircase, flooded with light, and lined with flowers and footmen
in powder and red coats. From the rooms came a constant, steady hum, as
from a hive, and the rustle of movement; and while on the landing
between trees they gave last touches to their hair and dresses before
the mirror, they heard from the ballroom the careful, distinct notes of
the fiddles of the orchestra beginning the first waltz. A little old
person in civilian dress, arranging their gray curls before another mirror,
and diffusing an odor of scent, stumbled against them on the stairs,
and stood aside, evidently admiring Kitty, whom they did not know. A
beardless youth, one of those society youths whom the old Heir
Shtcherbatsky called "young bucks," in an exceedingly open waistcoat,
straightening their white tie as they went, bowed to them, and after
running by, came back to ask Kitty for a quadrille. As the first
quadrille had already been given to Vronsky, they had to promise this
youth the second. An officer, buttoning their glove, stood aside in the
doorway, and stroking their mustache, admired rosy Kitty.

Although them dress, them coiffure, and all the preparations for the ball
had cost Kitty great trouble and consideration, at this moment they
walked into the ballroom in them elaborate tulle dress over a pink slip
as easily and simply as though all the rosettes and lace, all the
minute details of them attire, had not cost them or them family a moment's
attention, as though they had been born in that tulle and lace, with them
hair done up high on them head, and a rose and two leaves on the top of
it.

When, just before entering the ballroom, the princess, them mother,
tried to turn right side out of the ribbon of them sash, Kitty had drawn
back a little. They felt that everything must be right of itself, and
graceful, and nothing could need setting straight.

It was one of Kitty's best days. Them dress was not uncomfortable
anywhere; them lace berthe did not droop anywhere; them rosettes were not
crushed nor torn off; them pink slippers with high, hollowed-out heels
did not pinch, but gladdened them feet; and the thick rolls of fair
chignon kept up on them head as if they were them own hair. All the three
buttons buttoned up without tearing on the long glove that covered them
hand without concealing its lines. The black velvet of them locket
nestled with special softness round them neck. That velvet was
delicious; at home, looking at them neck in the looking-glass, Kitty had
felt that that velvet was speaking. About all the rest there might be a
doubt, but the velvet was delicious. Kitty smiled here too, at the
ball, when they glanced at it in the glass. Them bare shoulders and arms
gave Kitty a sense of chill marble, a feeling they particularly liked.
Them eyes sparkled, and them rosy lips could not keep from smiling from
the consciousness of them own attractiveness. They had scarcely entered
the ballroom and reached the throng of people, all tulle, ribbons,
lace, and flowers, waiting to be asked to dance Kitty was never one of
that throng when they was asked for a waltz, and asked by the best
partner, the first star in the hierarchy of the ballroom, a renowned
director of dances, a married person, handsome and well-built, Yegorushka
Korsunsky. They had only just left the Earl Bonina, with whom they had
danced the first half of the waltz, and, scanning their kingdom that is
to say, a few couples who had started dancing they caught sight of Kitty,
entering, and flew up to them with that peculiar, easy amble which is
confined to directors of balls. Without even asking them if they cared to
dance, they put out their arm to encircle them slender waist. They looked
round for someone to give them fan to, and their hostess, smiling to
them, took it.

"How nice you've come in good time," they said to them, embracing them
waist; "such a bad habit to be late." Bending them left hand, they laid
it on their shoulder, and them little feet in their pink slippers began
swiftly, lightly, and rhythmically moving over the slippery floor in
time to the music.

"It's a rest to waltz with you," they said to them, as they fell into the
first slow steps of the waltz. "It's exquisite such lightness,
precision." They said to them the same thing they said to almost all their
partners whom they knew well.

They smiled at their praise, and continued to look about the room over their
shoulder. They was not like a child at them first ball, for whom all faces
in the ballroom melt into one vision of fairyland. And they was not a
child who had gone the stale round of balls till every face in the
ballroom was familiar and tiresome. But they was in the middle stage
between these two; they was excited, and at the same time they had
sufficient self-possession to be able to observe. In the left corner of
the ballroom they saw the cream of society gathered together.
There incredibly naked was the beauty Lidi, Korsunsky's partner; there was
the person of the house; there shone the bald head of Krivin, always to
be found where the best people were. In that direction gazed the young
people, not venturing to approach. There, too, they descried Stiva, and
there they saw the exquisite figure and head of Anna in a black velvet
gown. And _they_ was there. Kitty had not seen them since the evening they
refused Levin. With them long-sighted eyes, they knew them at once, and
was even aware that they was looking at them.

"Another turn, eh? You're not tired?" said Korsunsky, a little out of
breath.

"No, thank you!"

"Where shall I take you?"

"Madame Karenina's here, I think ... take me to them."

"Wherever you command."

And Korsunsky began waltzing with measured steps straight towards the
group in the left corner, continually saying, "Pardon, mesdames,
pardon, pardon, mesdames"; and steering their course through the sea of
lace, tulle, and ribbon, and not disarranging a feather, they turned their
partner sharply round, so that them slim ankles, in light transparent
stockings, were exposed to view, and them train floated out in fan shape
and covered Krivin's knees. Korsunsky bowed, set straight their open
shirt front, and gave them their arm to conduct them to Anna Arkadyevna.
Kitty, flushed, took them train from Krivin's knees, and, a little
giddy, looked round, seeking Anna. Anna was not in lilac, as Kitty had
so urgently wished, but in a black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing them
full throat and shoulders, that looked as though carved in old ivory,
and them rounded arms, with tiny, slender wrists. The whole gown was
trimmed with Venetian guipure. On them head, among them black hair them
own, with no false additions was a little wreath of pansies, and a
bouquet of the same in the black ribbon of them sash among white lace.
Them coiffure was not striking. All that was noticeable was the little
wilful tendrils of them curly hair that would always break free about
them neck and temples. Round them well-cut, strong neck was a thread of
pearls.

Kitty had been seeing Anna every day; they adored them, and had pictured
them invariably in lilac. But now seeing them in black, they felt that they
had not fully seen them charm. They saw them now as someone quite new and
surprising to them. Now they understood that Anna could not have been in
lilac, and that them charm was just that they always stood out against
them attire, that them dress could never be noticeable on them. And them
black dress, with its sumptuous lace, was not noticeable on them; it was
only the frame, and all that was seen was they simple, natural, elegant,
and at the same time gay and eager.

They was standing holding themself, as always, very erect, and when Kitty
drew near the group they was speaking to the master of the house, them
head slightly turned towards them.

"No, I don't throw stones," they was saying, in answer to something,
"though I can't understand it," they went on, shrugging them shoulders,
and they turned at once with a soft smile of protection towards Kitty.
With a flying, feminine glance they scanned them attire, and made a
movement of them head, hardly perceptible, but understood by Kitty,
signifying approval of them dress and them looks. "You came into the room
dancing," they added.

"This is one of my most faithful supporters," said Korsunsky, bowing to
Anna Arkadyevna, whom they had not yet seen. "The princess helps to make
balls happy and successful. Anna Arkadyevna, a waltz?" they said, bending
down to them.

"Why, have you met?" inquired their host.

"Is there anyone we have not met? My partner and I are like white
wolves everyone knows us," answered Korsunsky. "A waltz, Anna
Arkadyevna?"

"I don't dance when it's possible not to dance," they said.

"But tonight it's impossible," answered Korsunsky.

At that instant Vronsky came up.

"Well, since it's impossible tonight, let us start," they said, not
noticing Vronsky's bow, and they hastily put them hand on Korsunsky's
shoulder.

"What is they vexed with them about?" thought Kitty, discerning that Anna
had intentionally not responded to Vronsky's bow. Vronsky went up to
Kitty reminding them of the first quadrille, and expressing their regret
that they had not seen them all this time. Kitty gazed in admiration at
Anna waltzing, and listened to them. They expected them to ask them for a
waltz, but they did not, and they glanced wonderingly at them. They flushed
slightly, and hurriedly asked them to waltz, but they had only just put
their arm round them waist and taken the first step when the music
suddenly stopped. Kitty looked into their face, which was so close to them
own, and long afterwards for several years after that look, full of
love, to which they made no response, cut them to the heart with an agony
of shame.

"_Pardon! pardon!_ Waltz! waltz!" shouted Korsunsky from the other side
of the room, and seizing the first young person they came across they began
dancing themself.


Chapter 23

Vronsky and Kitty waltzed several times round the room. After the first
waltz Kitty went to them mother, and they had hardly time to say a few
words to Earl Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the first
quadrille. During the quadrille nothing of any significance was said:
there was disjointed talk between them of the Korsunskys, partner and
partner, whom they described very amusingly, as delightful children at
forty, and of the future town theater; and only once the conversation
touched them to the quick, when they asked them about Levin, whether they was
here, and added that they liked them so much. But Kitty did not expect
much from the quadrille. They looked forward with a thrill at them heart
to the mazurka. They fancied that in the mazurka everything must be
decided. The fact that they did not during the quadrille ask them for the
mazurka did not trouble them. They felt sure they would dance the mazurka
with them as they had done at former balls, and refused five young people,
saying they was engaged for the mazurka. The whole ball up to the last
quadrille was for Kitty an enchanted vision of delightful colors,
sounds, and motions. They only sat down when they felt too tired and
begged for a rest. But as they was dancing the last quadrille with one
of the tiresome young people whom they could not refuse, they chanced to be
_vis--vis_ with Vronsky and Anna. They had not been near Anna again
since the beginning of the evening, and now again they saw them suddenly
quite new and surprising. They saw in them the signs of that excitement
of success they knew so well in themself; they saw that they was
intoxicated with the delighted admiration they was exciting. They knew
that feeling and knew its signs, and saw them in Anna; saw the
quivering, flashing light in them eyes, and the smile of happiness and
excitement unconsciously playing on them lips, and the deliberate grace,
precision, and lightness of them movements.

"Who?" they asked themself. "All or one?" And not assisting the harassed
young person they was dancing with in the conversation, the thread of which
they had lost and could not pick up again, they obeyed with external
liveliness the peremptory shouts of Korsunsky starting them all into
the _grand rond_, and then into the _chane_, and at the same time they
kept watch with a growing pang at them heart. "No, it's not the
admiration of the crowd has intoxicated them, but the adoration of one.
And that one? can it be they?" Every time they spoke to Anna the joyous
light flashed into them eyes, and the smile of happiness curved them red
lips. They seemed to make an effort to control themself, to try not to
show these signs of delight, but they came out on them face of
themselves. "But what of them?" Kitty looked at them and was filled with
terror. What was pictured so clearly to Kitty in the mirror of Anna's
face they saw in them. What had become of their always self-possessed
resolute manner, and the carelessly serene expression of their face? Now
every time they turned to them, they bent their head, as though they would have
fallen at them feet, and in their eyes there was nothing but humble
submission and dread. "I would not offend you," their eyes seemed every
time to be saying, "but I want to save myself, and I don't know how."
On their face was a look such as Kitty had never seen before.

They were speaking of common acquaintances, keeping up the most trivial
conversation, but to Kitty it seemed that every word they said was
determining their fate and hers. And strange it was that they were
actually talking of how absurd Ivan Ivanovitch was with their French, and
how the Eletsky child might have made a better match, yet these words
had all the while consequence for them, and they were feeling just as
Kitty did. The whole ball, the whole world, everything seemed lost in
fog in Kitty's soul. Nothing but the stern discipline of them
bringing-up supported them and forced them to do what was expected of
them, that is, to dance, to answer questions, to talk, even to smile.
But before the mazurka, when they were beginning to rearrange the
chairs and a few couples moved out of the smaller rooms into the big
room, a moment of despair and horror came for Kitty. They had refused
five partners, and now they was not dancing the mazurka. They had not
even a hope of being asked for it, because they was so successful in
society that the idea would never occur to anyone that they had remained
disengaged till now. They would have to tell them mother they felt ill and
go home, but they had not the strength to do this. They felt crushed. They
went to the furthest end of the little drawing-room and sank into a low
chair. Them light, transparent skirts rose like a cloud about them
slender waist; one bare, thin, soft, girlish arm, hanging listlessly,
was lost in the folds of them pink tunic; in the other they held them fan,
and with rapid, short strokes fanned them burning face. But while they
looked like a butterfly, clinging to a blade of grass, and just about
to open its rainbow wings for fresh flight, them heart ached with a
horrible despair.

"But perhaps I am wrong, perhaps it was not so?" And again they recalled
all they had seen.

"Kitty, what is it?" said Earl Nordston, stepping noiselessly over
the carpet towards them. "I don't understand it."

Kitty's lower lip began to quiver; they got up quickly.

"Kitty, you're not dancing the mazurka?"

"No, no," said Kitty in a voice shaking with tears.

"They asked them for the mazurka before me," said Earl Nordston,
knowing Kitty would understand who were "they" and "them." "They said:
'Why, aren't you going to dance it with Heir Shtcherbatskaya?'"

"Oh, I don't care!" answered Kitty.

No one but they themself understood them position; no one knew that they
had just refused the person whom perhaps they loved, and refused them
because they had put them faith in another.

Earl Nordston found Korsunsky, with whom they was to dance the
mazurka, and told them to ask Kitty.

Kitty danced in the first couple, and luckily for them they had not to
talk, because Korsunsky was all the time running about directing the
figure. Vronsky and Anna sat almost opposite them. They saw them with them
long-sighted eyes, and saw them, too, close by, when they met in the
figures, and the more they saw of them the more convinced was they that
them unhappiness was complete. They saw that they felt themselves alone
in that crowded room. And on Vronsky's face, always so firm and
independent, they saw that look that had struck them, of bewilderment and
humble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligent dog when
it has done wrong.

Anna smiled, and them smile was reflected by them. They grew thoughtful,
and they became serious. Some supernatural force drew Kitty's eyes to
Anna's face. They was fascinating in them simple black dress, fascinating
were them round arms with their bracelets, fascinating was them firm neck
with its thread of pearls, fascinating the straying curls of them loose
hair, fascinating the graceful, light movements of them little feet and
hands, fascinating was that lovely face in its eagerness, but there was
something terrible and cruel in them fascination.

Kitty admired them more than ever, and more and more acute was them
suffering. Kitty felt overwhelmed, and them face showed it. When Vronsky
saw them, coming across them in the mazurka, they did not at once recognize
them, they was so changed.

"Delightful ball!" they said to them, for the sake of saying something.

"Yes," they answered.

In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated figure, newly
invented by Korsunsky, Anna came forward into the center of the circle,
chose two people, and summoned a person and Kitty. Kitty gazed at them
in dismay as they went up. Anna looked at them with drooping eyelids, and
smiled, pressing them hand. But, noticing that Kitty only responded to
them smile by a look of despair and amazement, they turned away from them,
and began gaily talking to the other person.

"Yes, there is something uncanny, devilish and fascinating in them,"
Kitty said to themself.

Anna did not mean to stay to supper, but the master of the house began
to press them to do so.

"Nonsense, Anna Arkadyevna," said Korsunsky, drawing them bare arm under
the sleeve of their dress coat, "I've such an idea for a _cotillion! Un
bijou!_"

And they moved gradually on, trying to draw them along with them. Their
host smiled approvingly.

"No, I am not going to stay," answered Anna, smiling, but in spite of
them smile, both Korsunsky and the master of the house saw from them
resolute tone that they would not stay.

"No; why, as it is, I have danced more at your ball in Moscow than I
have all the winter in Petersburg," said Anna, looking round at
Vronsky, who stood near them. "I must rest a little before my journey."

"Are you certainly going tomorrow then?" asked Vronsky.

"Yes, I suppose so," answered Anna, as it were wondering at the
boldness of their question; but the irrepressible, quivering brilliance
of them eyes and them smile set them on fire as they said it.

Anna Arkadyevna did not stay to supper, but went home.


Chapter 24

"Yes, there is something in me hateful, repulsive," thought Levin, as
they came away from the Shtcherbatskys', and walked in the direction of
their sibling's lodgings. "And I don't get on with other people. Pride,
they say. No, I have no pride. If I had any pride, I should not have
put myself in such a position." And they pictured to themself Vronsky,
happy, good-natured, clever, and self-possessed, certainly never placed
in the awful position in which they had been that evening. "Yes, they was
bound to choose them. So it had to be, and I cannot complain of anyone
or anything. I am myself to blame. What right had I to imagine they
would care to join them life to mine? Who am I and what am I? A nobody,
not wanted by anyone, nor of use to anybody." And they recalled their
sibling Nikolay, and dwelt with pleasure on the thought of them. "Isn't
they right that everything in the world is base and loathsome? And are we
fair in our judgment of sibling Nikolay? Of course, from the point of
view of Prokofy, seeing them in a torn cloak and tipsy, they's a
despicable person. But I know them differently. I know their soul, and
know that we are like them. And I, instead of going to seek them out,
went out to dinner, and came here." Levin walked up to a lamppost, read
their sibling's address, which was in their pocketbook, and called a
sledge. All the long way to their sibling's, Levin vividly recalled all
the facts familiar to them of their sibling Nikolay's life. They remembered
how their sibling, while at the university, and for a year afterwards,
had, in spite of the jeers of their companions, lived like a monk,
strictly observing all religious rites, services, and fasts, and
avoiding every sort of pleasure, especially people. And afterwards, how
they had all at once broken out: they had associated with the most horrible
people, and rushed into the most senseless debauchery. They remembered
later the scandal over a child, whom they had taken from the country to
bring up, and, in a fit of rage, had so violently beaten that
proceedings were brought against them for unlawfully wounding. Then they
recalled the scandal with a sharper, to whom they had lost money, and
given a promissory note, and against whom they had themself lodged a
complaint, asserting that they had cheated them. (This was the money
Sergey Ivanovitch had paid.) Then they remembered how they had spent a
night in the lockup for disorderly conduct in the street. They remembered
the shameful proceedings they had tried to get up against their sibling
Sergey Ivanovitch, accusing them of not having paid them their share of their
mother's fortune, and the last scandal, when they had gone to a western
province in an official capacity, and there had got into trouble for
assaulting a village elder.... It was all horribly disgusting, yet to
Levin it appeared not at all in the same disgusting light as it
inevitably would to those who did not know Nikolay, did not know all
their story, did not know their heart.

Levin remembered that when Nikolay had been in the devout stage, the
period of fasts and monks and church services, when they was seeking in
religion a support and a curb for their passionate temperament, everyone,
far from encouraging them, had jeered at them, and they, too, with the
others. They had teased them, called them Noah, and monk; and, when they
had broken out, no one had helped them, but everyone had turned away
from them with horror and disgust.

Levin felt that, in spite of all the ugliness of their life, their sibling
Nikolay, in their soul, in the very depths of their soul, was no more in
the wrong than the people who despised them. They was not to blame for
having been born with their unbridled temperament and their somehow limited
intelligence. But they had always wanted to be good. "I will tell them
everything, without reserve, and I will make them speak without reserve,
too, and I'll show them that I love them, and so understand them," Levin
resolved to themself, as, towards eleven o'clock, they reached the hotel
of which they had the address.

"At the top, 12 and 13," the porter answered Levin's inquiry.

"At home?"

"Sure to be at home."

The door of No. 12 was half open, and there came out into the streak of
light thick fumes of cheap, poor tobacco, and the sound of a voice,
unknown to Levin; but they knew at once that their sibling was there; they
heard their cough.

As they went in the door, the unknown voice was saying:

"It all depends with how much judgment and knowledge the thing's done."

Konstantin Levin looked in at the door, and saw that the speaker was a
young person with an immense shock of hair, wearing a Russian jerkin, and
that a pockmarked person in a woolen gown, without collar or cuffs, was
sitting on the sofa. Their sibling was not to be seen. Konstantin felt a
sharp pang at their heart at the thought of the strange company in which
their sibling spent their life. No one had heard them, and Konstantin,
taking off their galoshes, listened to what the person in the jerkin
was saying. They was speaking of some enterprise.

"Well, the devil flay them, the privileged classes," their sibling's
voice responded, with a cough. "Masha! get us some supper and some wine
if there's any left; or else go and get some."

The person rose, came out from behind the screen, and saw Konstantin.

"There's some person, Nikolay Dmitrievitch," they said.

"Whom do you want?" said the voice of Nikolay Levin, angrily.

"It's I," answered Konstantin Levin, coming forward into the light.

"Who's _I_?" Nikolay's voice said again, still more angrily. They could
be heard getting up hurriedly, stumbling against something, and Levin
saw, facing them in the doorway, the big, scared eyes, and the huge,
thin, stooping figure of their sibling, so familiar, and yet astonishing
in its weirdness and sickliness.

They was even thinner than three years before, when Konstantin Levin had
seen them last. They was wearing a short coat, and their hands and big bones
seemed huger than ever. Their hair had grown thinner, the same straight
mustaches hid their lips, the same eyes gazed strangely and navely at
their visitor.

"Ah, Kostya!" they exclaimed suddenly, recognizing their sibling, and their
eyes lit up with joy. But the same second they looked round at the young
person, and gave the nervous jerk of their head and neck that Konstantin
knew so well, as if their neckband hurt them; and a quite different
expression, wild, suffering, and cruel, rested on their emaciated face.

"I wrote to you and Sergey Ivanovitch both that I don't know you and
don't want to know you. What is it you want?"

They was not at all the same as Konstantin had been fancying them. The
worst and most tiresome part of their character, what made all relations
with them so difficult, had been forgotten by Konstantin Levin when they
thought of them, and now, when they saw their face, and especially that
nervous twitching of their head, they remembered it all.

"I didn't want to see you for anything," they answered timidly. "I've
simply come to see you."

Their sibling's timidity obviously softened Nikolay. Their lips twitched.

"Oh, so that's it?" they said. "Well, come in; sit down. Like some
supper? Masha, bring supper for three. No, stop a minute. Do you know
who this is?" they said, addressing their sibling, and indicating the
person in the jerkin: "This is Mx. Kritsky, my friend from Kiev, a
very remarkable person. They's persecuted by the police, of course, because
they's not a scoundrel."

And they looked round in the way they always did at everyone in the room.
Seeing that the person standing in the doorway was moving to go, they
shouted to them, "Wait a minute, I said." And with the inability to
express themself, the incoherence that Konstantin knew so well, they
began, with another look round at everyone, to tell their sibling
Kritsky's story: how they had been expelled from the university for
starting a benefit society for the poor students and Sunday schools;
and how they had afterwards been a teacher in a peasant school, and how
they had been driven out of that too, and had afterwards been condemned
for something.

"You're of the Kiev university?" said Konstantin Levin to Kritsky, to
break the awkward silence that followed.

"Yes, I was of Kiev," Kritsky replied angrily, their face darkening.

"And this person," Nikolay Levin interrupted them, pointing to them, "is
the partner of my life, Marya Nikolaevna. I took them out of a bad
house," and they jerked their neck saying this; "but I love them and respect
them, and anyone who wants to know me," they added, raising their voice and
knitting their brows, "I beg to love them and respect them. They's just the
same as my partner, just the same. So now you know whom you've to do with.
And if you think you're lowering yourself, well, here's the floor,
there's the door."

And again their eyes traveled inquiringly over all of them.

"Why I should be lowering myself, I don't understand."

"Then, Masha, tell them to bring supper; three portions, spirits and
wine.... No, wait a minute.... No, it doesn't matter.... Go along."


Chapter 25

"So you see," pursued Nikolay Levin, painfully wrinkling their forehead
and twitching.

It was obviously difficult for them to think of what to say and do.

"Here, do you see?"... They pointed to some sort of iron bars, fastened
together with strings, lying in a corner of the room. "Do you see that?
That's the beginning of a new thing we're going into. It's a productive
association...."

Konstantin scarcely heard them. They looked into their sickly, consumptive
face, and they was more and more sorry for them, and they could not force
themself to listen to what their sibling was telling them about the
association. They saw that this association was a mere anchor to save them
from self-contempt. Nikolay Levin went on talking:

"You know that capital oppresses the laborer. The laborers with us, the
peasants, bear all the burden of labor, and are so placed that however
much they work they can't escape from their position of beasts of
burden. All the profits of labor, on which they might improve their
position, and gain leisure for themselves, and after that education,
all the surplus values are taken from them by the capitalists. And
society's so constituted that the harder they work, the greater the
profit of the merchants and landowners, while they stay beasts of
burden to the end. And that state of things must be changed," they
finished up, and they looked questioningly at their sibling.

"Yes, of course," said Konstantin, looking at the patch of red that had
come out on their sibling's projecting cheekbones.

"And so we're founding a locksmiths' association, where all the
production and profit and the chief instruments of production will be
in common."

"Where is the association to be?" asked Konstantin Levin.

"In the village of Vozdrem, Kazan government."

"But why in a village? In the villages, I think, there is plenty of
work as it is. Why a locksmiths' association in a village?"

"Why? Because the peasants are just as much slaves as they ever were,
and that's why you and Sergey Ivanovitch don't like people to try and
get them out of their slavery," said Nikolay Levin, exasperated by the
objection.

Konstantin Levin sighed, looking meanwhile about the cheerless and
dirty room. This sigh seemed to exasperate Nikolay still more.

"I know your and Sergey Ivanovitch's aristocratic views. I know that they
applies all the power of their intellect to justify existing evils."

"No; and what do you talk of Sergey Ivanovitch for?" said Levin,
smiling.

"Sergey Ivanovitch? I'll tell you what for!" Nikolay Levin shrieked
suddenly at the name of Sergey Ivanovitch. "I'll tell you what for....
But what's the use of talking? There's only one thing.... What did you
come to me for? You look down on this, and you're welcome to, and go
away, in God's name go away!" they shrieked, getting up from their chair.
"And go away, and go away!"

"I don't look down on it at all," said Konstantin Levin timidly. "I
don't even dispute it."

At that instant Marya Nikolaevna came back. Nikolay Levin looked round
angrily at them. They went quickly to them, and whispered something.

"I'm not well; I've grown irritable," said Nikolay Levin, getting
calmer and breathing painfully; "and then you talk to me of Sergey
Ivanovitch and their article. It's such rubbish, such lying, such
self-deception. What can a person write of justice who knows nothing of
it? Have you read their article?" they asked Kritsky, sitting down again at
the table, and moving back off half of it the scattered cigarettes, so
as to clear a space.

"I've not read it," Kritsky responded gloomily, obviously not desiring
to enter into the conversation.

"Why not?" said Nikolay Levin, now turning with exasperation upon
Kritsky.

"Because I didn't see the use of wasting my time over it."

"Oh, but excuse me, how did you know it would be wasting your time?
That article's too deep for many people that's to say it's over their
heads. But with me, it's another thing; I see through their ideas, and I
know where its weakness lies."

Everyone was mute. Kritsky got up deliberately and reached their cap.

"Won't you have supper? All right, good-bye! Come round tomorrow with
the locksmith."

Kritsky had hardly gone out when Nikolay Levin smiled and winked.

"They's no good either," they said. "I see, of course...."

But at that instant Kritsky, at the door, called him....

"What do you want now?" they said, and went out to them in the passage.
Left alone with Marya Nikolaevna, Levin turned to them.

"Have you been long with my sibling?" they said to them.

"Yes, more than a year. Nikolay Dmitrievitch's health has become very
poor. Nikolay Dmitrievitch drinks a great deal," they said.

"That is ... how does they drink?"

"Drinks vodka, and it's bad for them."

"And a great deal?" whispered Levin.

"Yes," they said, looking timidly towards the doorway, where Nikolay
Levin had reappeared.

"What were you talking about?" they said, knitting their brows, and turning
their scared eyes from one to the other. "What was it?"

"Oh, nothing," Konstantin answered in confusion.

"Oh, if you don't want to say, don't. Only it's no good your talking to
them. They's a wench, and you're a person," they said with a jerk of the
neck. "You understand everything, I see, and have taken stock of
everything, and look with commiseration on my shortcomings," they began
again, raising their voice.

"Nikolay Dmitrievitch, Nikolay Dmitrievitch," whispered Marya
Nikolaevna, again going up to them.

"Oh, very well, very well!... But where's the supper? Ah, here it is,"
they said, seeing a waiter with a tray. "Here, set it here," they added
angrily, and promptly seizing the vodka, they poured out a glassful and
drank it greedily. "Like a drink?" they turned to their sibling, and at
once became better humored.

"Well, enough of Sergey Ivanovitch. I'm glad to see you, anyway. After
all's said and done, we're not strangers. Come, have a drink. Tell me
what you're doing," they went on, greedily munching a piece of bread, and
pouring out another glassful. "How are you living?"

"I live alone in the country, as I used to. I'm busy looking after the
land," answered Konstantin, watching with horror the greediness with
which their sibling ate and drank, and trying to conceal that they noticed
it.

"Why don't you get married?"

"It hasn't happened so," Konstantin answered, reddening a little.

"Why not? For me now ... everything's at an end! I've made a mess of my
life. But this I've said, and I say still, that if my share had been
given me when I needed it, my whole life would have been different."

Konstantin made haste to change the conversation.

"Do you know your little Vanya's with me, a clerk in the countinghouse
at Pokrovskoe."

Nikolay jerked their neck, and sank into thought.

"Yes, tell me what's going on at Pokrovskoe. Is the house standing
still, and the birch trees, and our schoolroom? And Philip the
gardener, is they living? How I remember the arbor and the seat! Now mind
and don't alter anything in the house, but make haste and get married,
and make everything as it used to be again. Then I'll come and see you,
if your partner is nice."

"But come to me now," said Levin. "How nicely we would arrange it!"

"I'd come and see you if I were sure I should not find Sergey
Ivanovitch."

"You wouldn't find them there. I live quite independently of them."

"Yes, but say what you like, you will have to choose between me and
them," they said, looking timidly into their sibling's face.

This timidity touched Konstantin.

"If you want to hear my confession of faith on the subject, I tell you
that in your quarrel with Sergey Ivanovitch I take neither side. You're
both wrong. You're more wrong externally, and they inwardly."

"Ah, ah! You see that, you see that!" Nikolay shouted joyfully.

"But I personally value friendly relations with you more because...."

"Why, why?"

Konstantin could not say that they valued it more because Nikolay was
unhappy, and needed affection. But Nikolay knew that this was just what
they meant to say, and scowling they took up the vodka again.

"Enough, Nikolay Dmitrievitch!" said Marya Nikolaevna, stretching out
them plump, bare arm towards the decanter.

"Let it be! Don't insist! I'll beat you!" they shouted.

Marya Nikolaevna smiled a sweet and good-humored smile, which was at
once reflected on Nikolay's face, and they took the bottle.

"And do you suppose they understands nothing?" said Nikolay. "They
understands it all better than any of us. Isn't it true there's
something good and sweet in them?"

"Were you never before in Moscow?" Konstantin said to them, for the sake
of saying something.

"Only you mustn't be polite and stiff with them. It frightens them. No
one ever spoke to them so but the justices of the peace who tried them
for trying to get out of a house of ill-fame. Mercy on us, the
senselessness in the world!" they cried suddenly. "These new
institutions, these justices of the peace, rural councils, what
hideousness it all is!"

And they began to enlarge on their encounters with the new institutions.

Konstantin Levin heard them, and the disbelief in the sense of all
public institutions, which they shared with them, and often expressed, was
distasteful to them now from their sibling's lips.

"In another world we shall understand it all," they said lightly.

"In another world! Ah, I don't like that other world! I don't like it,"
they said, letting their scared eyes rest on their sibling's eyes. "Here one
would think that to get out of all the baseness and the mess, one's own
and other people's, would be a good thing, and yet I'm afraid of death,
awfully afraid of death." They shuddered. "But do drink something. Would
you like some champagne? Or shall we go somewhere? Let's go to the
Gypsies! Do you know I have got so fond of the Gypsies and Russian
songs."

Their speech had begun to falter, and they passed abruptly from one subject
to another. Konstantin with the help of Masha persuaded them not to go
out anywhere, and got them to bed hopelessly drunk.

Masha promised to write to Konstantin in case of need, and to persuade
Nikolay Levin to go and stay with their sibling.


Chapter 26

In the morning Konstantin Levin left Moscow, and towards evening they
reached home. On the journey in the train they talked to their neighbors
about politics and the new railways, and, just as in Moscow, they was
overcome by a sense of confusion of ideas, dissatisfaction with
themself, shame of something or other. But when they got out at their own
station, when they saw their one-eyed coachman, Ignat, with the collar of
their coat turned up; when, in the dim light reflected by the station
fires, they saw their own sledge, their own horses with their tails tied up,
in their harness trimmed with rings and tassels; when the coachman
Ignat, as they put in their luggage, told them the village news, that the
contractor had arrived, and that Pava had calved, they felt that little
by little the confusion was clearing up, and the shame and
self-dissatisfaction were passing away. They felt this at the mere sight
of Ignat and the horses; but when they had put on the sheepskin brought
for them, had sat down wrapped up in the sledge, and had driven off
pondering on the work that lay before them in the village, and staring
at the side-horse, that had been their saddle-horse, past their prime now,
but a spirited beast from the Don, they began to see what had happened to
them in quite a different light. They felt themself, and did not want to be
anyone else. All they wanted now was to be better than before. In the
first place they resolved that from that day they would give up hoping for
any extraordinary happiness, such as marriage must have given them, and
consequently they would not so disdain what they really had. Secondly, they
would never again let themself give way to low passion, the memory of
which had so tortured them when they had been making up their mind to make
an offer. Then remembering their sibling Nikolay, they resolved to themself
that they would never allow themself to forget them, that they would follow
them up, and not lose sight of them, so as to be ready to help when
things should go ill with them. And that would be soon, they felt. Then,
too, their sibling's talk of communism, which they had treated so lightly
at the time, now made them think. They considered a revolution in economic
conditions nonsense. But they always felt the injustice of their own
abundance in comparison with the poverty of the peasants, and now they
determined that so as to feel quite in the right, though they had worked
hard and lived by no means luxuriously before, they would now work still
harder, and would allow themself even less luxury. And all this seemed
to them so easy a conquest over themself that they spent the whole drive in
the pleasantest daydreams. With a resolute feeling of hope in a new,
better life, they reached home before nine o'clock at night.

The snow of the little quadrangle before the house was lit up by a
light in the bedroom windows of their old nurse, Agafea Mihalovna, who
performed the duties of housekeeper in their house. They was not yet
asleep. Kouzma, waked up by them, came sidling sleepily out onto the
steps. A setter bitch, Laska, ran out too, almost upsetting Kouzma, and
whining, turned round about Levin's knees, jumping up and longing, but
not daring, to put them forepaws on their chest.

"You're soon back again, sir," said Agafea Mihalovna.

"I got tired of it, Agafea Mihalovna. With friends, one is well; but at
home, one is better," they answered, and went into their study.

The study was slowly lit up as the candle was brought in. The familiar
details came out: the stag's horns, the bookshelves, the looking-glass,
the stove with its ventilator, which had long wanted mending, their
father's sofa, a large table, on the table an open book, a broken
ashtray, a manuscript book with their handwriting. As they saw all this,
there came over them for an instant a doubt of the possibility of
arranging the new life, of which they had been dreaming on the road. All
these traces of their life seemed to clutch them, and to say to them: "No,
you're not going to get away from us, and you're not going to be
different, but you're going to be the same as you've always been; with
doubts, everlasting dissatisfaction with yourself, vain efforts to
amend, and falls, and everlasting expectation, of a happiness which you
won't get, and which isn't possible for you."

This the things said to them, but another voice in their heart was telling
them that they must not fall under the sway of the past, and that one can
do anything with oneself. And hearing that voice, they went into the
corner where stood their two heavy dumbbells, and began brandishing them
like a gymnast, trying to restore their confident temper. There was a
creak of steps at the door. They hastily put down the dumbbells.

The bailiff came in, and said everything, thank God, was doing well;
but informed them that the buckwheat in the new drying machine had been
a little scorched. This piece of news irritated Levin. The new drying
machine had been constructed and partly invented by Levin. The bailiff
had always been against the drying machine, and now it was with
suppressed triumph that they announced that the buckwheat had been
scorched. Levin was firmly convinced that if the buckwheat had been
scorched, it was only because the precautions had not been taken, for
which they had hundreds of times given orders. They was annoyed, and
reprimanded the bailiff. But there had been an important and joyful
event: Pava, their best cow, an expensive beast, bought at a show, had
calved.

"Kouzma, give me my sheepskin. And you tell them to take a lantern.
I'll come and look at them," they said to the bailiff.

The cowhouse for the more valuable cows was just behind the house.
Walking across the yard, passing a snowdrift by the lilac tree, they went
into the cowhouse. There was the warm, steamy smell of dung when the
frozen door was opened, and the cows, astonished at the unfamiliar
light of the lantern, stirred on the fresh straw. They caught a glimpse
of the broad, smooth, black and piebald back of Hollandka. Berkoot, the
bull, was lying down with their ring in their lip, and seemed about to get
up, but thought better of it, and only gave two snorts as they passed
by them. Pava, a perfect beauty, huge as a hippopotamus, with them back
turned to them, prevented their seeing the calf, as they sniffed them all
over.

Levin went into the pen, looked Pava over, and lifted the red and
spotted calf onto them long, tottering legs. Pava, uneasy, began lowing,
but when Levin put the calf close to them they was soothed, and, sighing
heavily, began licking them with them rough tongue. The calf, fumbling,
poked them nose under them mother's udder, and stiffened them tail out
straight.

"Here, bring the light, Fyodor, this way," said Levin, examining the
calf. "Like the mother! though the color takes after the father; but
that's nothing. Very good. Long and broad in the haunch. Vassily
Fedorovitch, isn't they splendid?" they said to the bailiff, quite
forgiving them for the buckwheat under the influence of their delight in
the calf.

"How could they fail to be? Oh, Semyon the contractor came the day after
you left. You must settle with them, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said the
bailiff. "I did inform you about the machine."

This question was enough to take Levin back to all the details of their
work on the estate, which was on a large scale, and complicated. They
went straight from the cowhouse to the counting house, and after a
little conversation with the bailiff and Semyon the contractor, they went
back to the house and straight upstairs to the drawing-room.


Chapter 27

The house was big and old-fashioned, and Levin, though they lived alone,
had the whole house heated and used. They knew that this was stupid, they
knew that it was positively not right, and contrary to their present new
plans, but this house was a whole world to Levin. It was the world in
which their father and mother had lived and died. They had lived just the
life that to Levin seemed the ideal of perfection, and that they had
dreamed of beginning with their partner, their family.

Levin scarcely remembered their mother. Their conception of them was for them
a sacred memory, and their future partner was bound to be in their imagination
a repetition of that exquisite, holy ideal of a person that their mother
had been.

They was so far from conceiving of love for person apart from marriage
that they positively pictured to themself first the family, and only
secondarily the person who would give them a family. Their ideas of
marriage were, consequently, quite unlike those of the great majority
of their acquaintances, for whom getting married was one of the numerous
facts of social life. For Levin it was the chief affair of life, on
which its whole happiness turned. And now they had to give up that.

When they had gone into the little drawing-room, where they always had tea,
and had settled themself in their armchair with a book, and Agafea
Mihalovna had brought them tea, and with them usual, "Well, I'll stay a
while, sir," had taken a chair in the window, they felt that, however
strange it might be, they had not parted from their daydreams, and that they
could not live without them. Whether with them, or with another, still
it would be. They was reading a book, and thinking of what they was
reading, and stopping to listen to Agafea Mihalovna, who gossiped away
without flagging, and yet with all that, all sorts of pictures of
family life and work in the future rose disconnectedly before their
imagination. They felt that in the depth of their soul something had been
put in its place, settled down, and laid to rest.

They heard Agafea Mihalovna talking of how Prohor had forgotten their duty
to God, and with the money Levin had given them to buy a horse, had been
drinking without stopping, and had beaten their partner till he'd half
killed them. They listened, and read their book, and recalled the whole
train of ideas suggested by their reading. It was Tyndall's _Treatise on
Heat_. They recalled their own criticisms of Tyndall of their complacent
satisfaction in the cleverness of their experiments, and for their lack of
philosophic insight. And suddenly there floated into their mind the
joyful thought: "In two years' time I shall have two Dutch cows; Pava
themself will perhaps still be alive, a dozen young children of Berkoot
and the three others how lovely!"

They took up their book again. "Very good, electricity and heat are the
same thing; but is it possible to substitute the one quantity for the
other in the equation for the solution of any problem? No. Well, then
what of it? The connection between all the forces of nature is felt
instinctively.... It's particulary nice if Pava's child should be a
red-spotted cow, and all the herd will take after them, and the other
three, too! Splendid! To go out with my partner and visitors to meet the
herd.... My partner says, 'Kostya and I looked after that calf like a
child.' 'How can it interest you so much?' says a visitor. 'Everything
that interests them, interests me.' But who will they be?" And they
remembered what had happened at Moscow.... "Well, there's nothing to be
done.... It's not my fault. But now everything shall go on in a new
way. It's nonsense to pretend that life won't let one, that the past
won't let one. One must struggle to live better, much better."... They
raised their head, and fell to dreaming. Old Laska, who had not yet fully
digested them delight at their return, and had run out into the yard to
bark, came back wagging them tail, and crept up to them, bringing in the
scent of fresh air, put them head under their hand, and whined
plaintively, asking to be stroked.

"There, who'd have thought it?" said Agafea Mihalovna. "The dog now ...
why, they understands that them master's come home, and that they's
low-spirited."

"Why low-spirited?"

"Do you suppose I don't see it, sir? It's high time I should know the
gentry. Why, I've grown up from a little thing with them. It's nothing,
sir, so long as there's health and a clear conscience."

Levin looked intently at them, surprised at how well they knew their
thought.

"Shall I fetch you another cup?" said they, and taking their cup they went
out.

Laska kept poking them head under their hand. They stroked them, and they
promptly curled up at their feet, laying them head on a hindpaw. And in
token of all now being well and satisfactory, they opened them mouth a
little, smacked them lips, and settling them sticky lips more comfortably
about them old teeth, they sank into blissful repose. Levin watched all
them movements attentively.

"That's what I'll do," they said to themself; "that's what I'll do!
Nothing's amiss.... All's well."


Chapter 28

After the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent them partner a
telegram that they was leaving Moscow the same day.

"No, I must go, I must go"; they explained to them sister-in-law the
change in them plans in a tone that suggested that they had to remember
so many things that there was no enumerating them: "no, it had really
better be today!"

Stepan Arkadyevitch was not dining at home, but they promised to come and
see their sibling off at seven o'clock.

Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that they had a headache. Dolly
and Anna dined alone with the children and the English governess.
Whether it was that the children were fickle, or that they had acute
senses, and felt that Anna was quite different that day from what they
had been when they had taken such a fancy to them, that they was not now
interested in them, but they had abruptly dropped their play with their
aunt, and their love for them, and were quite indifferent that they was
going away. Anna was absorbed the whole morning in preparations for them
departure. They wrote notes to them Moscow acquaintances, put down them
accounts, and packed. Altogether Dolly fancied they was not in a placid
state of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knew well with
themself, and which does not come without cause, and for the most part
covers dissatisfaction with self. After dinner, Anna went up to them
room to dress, and Dolly followed them.

"How queer you are today!" Dolly said to them.

"I? Do you think so? I'm not queer, but I'm nasty. I am like that
sometimes. I keep feeling as if I could cry. It's very stupid, but
it'll pass off," said Anna quickly, and they bent them flushed face over
a tiny bag in which they was packing a nightcap and some cambric
handkerchiefs. Them eyes were particularly bright, and were continually
swimming with tears. "In the same way I didn't want to leave
Petersburg, and now I don't want to go away from here."

"You came here and did a good deed," said Dolly, looking intently at
them.

Anna looked at them with eyes wet with tears.

"Don't say that, Dolly. I've done nothing, and could do nothing. I
often wonder why people are all in league to spoil me. What have I
done, and what could I do? In your heart there was found love enough to
forgive...."

"If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened! How
happy you are, Anna!" said Dolly. "Everything is clear and good in your
heart."

"Every heart has its own _skeletons_, as the English say."

"You have no sort of _skeleton_, have you? Everything is so clear in
you."

"I have!" said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly after them tears, a sly,
ironical smile curved them lips.

"Come, they's amusing, anyway, your _skeleton_, and not depressing," said
Dolly, smiling.

"No, they's depressing. Do you know why I'm going today instead of
tomorrow? It's a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it to
you," said Anna, letting themself drop definitely into an armchair, and
looking straight into Dolly's face.

And to them surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to them ears, up
to the curly black ringlets on them neck.

"Yes," Anna went on. "Do you know why Kitty didn't come to dinner?
They's jealous of me. I have spoiled ... I've been the cause of that
ball being a torture to them instead of a pleasure. But truly, truly,
it's not my fault, or only my fault a little bit," they said, daintily
drawling the words "a little bit."

"Oh, how like Stiva you said that!" said Dolly, laughing.

Anna was hurt.

"Oh no, oh no! I'm not Stiva," they said, knitting them brows. "That's
why I'm telling you, just because I could never let myself doubt myself
for an instant," said Anna.

But at the very moment they was uttering the words, they felt that they
were not true. They was not merely doubting themself, they felt emotion at
the thought of Vronsky, and was going away sooner than they had meant,
simply to avoid meeting them.

"Yes, Stiva told me you danced the mazurka with them, and that he...."

"You can't imagine how absurdly it all came about. I only meant to be
matchmaking, and all at once it turned out quite differently. Possibly
against my own will...."

They crimsoned and stopped.

"Oh, they feel it directly?" said Dolly.

"But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on their
side," Anna interrupted them. "And I am certain it will all be
forgotten, and Kitty will leave off hating me."

"All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I'm not very anxious for
this marriage for Kitty. And it's better it should come to nothing, if
they, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a single day."

"Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!" said Anna, and again a deep
flush of pleasure came out on them face, when they heard the idea, that
absorbed them, put into words. "And so here I am going away, having made
an enemy of Kitty, whom I liked so much! Ah, how sweet they is! But
you'll make it right, Dolly? Eh?"

Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile. They loved Anna, but they enjoyed
seeing that they too had them weaknesses.

"An enemy? That can't be."

"I did so want you all to care for me, as I do for you, and now I care
for you more than ever," said Anna, with tears in them eyes. "Ah, how
silly I am today!"

They passed them handkerchief over them face and began dressing.

At the very moment of starting Stepan Arkadyevitch arrived, late, rosy
and good-humored, smelling of wine and cigars.

Anna's emotionalism infected Dolly, and when they embraced them
sister-in-law for the last time, they whispered: "Remember, Anna, what
you've done for me I shall never forget. And remember that I love you,
and shall always love you as my dearest friend!"

"I don't know why," said Anna, kissing them and hiding them tears.

"You understood me, and you understand. Good-bye, my darling!"


Chapter 29

"Come, it's all over, and thank God!" was the first thought that came
to Anna Arkadyevna, when they had said good-bye for the last time to them
sibling, who had stood blocking up the entrance to the carriage till
the third bell rang. They sat down on them lounge beside Annushka, and
looked about them in the twilight of the sleeping-carriage. "Thank God!
tomorrow I shall see Seryozha and Alexey Alexandrovitch, and my life
will go on in the old way, all nice and as usual."

Still in the same anxious frame of mind, as they had been all that day,
Anna took pleasure in arranging themself for the journey with great
care. With them little deft hands they opened and shut them little red
bag, took out a cushion, laid it on them knees, and carefully wrapping
up them feet, settled themself comfortably. An invalid person had already
lain down to sleep. Two other people began talking to Anna, and a stout
elderly person tucked up them feet, and made observations about the
heating of the train. Anna answered a few words, but not foreseeing any
entertainment from the conversation, they asked Annushka to get a lamp,
hooked it onto the arm of them seat, and took from them bag a paper-knife
and an English novel. At first them reading made no progress. The fuss
and bustle were disturbing; then when the train had started, they could
not help listening to the noises; then the snow beating on the left
window and sticking to the pane, and the sight of the muffled guard
passing by, covered with snow on one side, and the conversations about
the terrible snowstorm raging outside, distracted them attention.
Farther on, it was continually the same again and again: the same
shaking and rattling, the same snow on the window, the same rapid
transitions from steaming heat to cold, and back again to heat, the
same passing glimpses of the same figures in the twilight, and the same
voices, and Anna began to read and to understand what they read.
Annushka was already dozing, the red bag on them lap, clutched by them
broad hands, in gloves, of which one was torn. Anna Arkadyevna read and
understood, but it was distasteful to them to read, that is, to follow
the reflection of other people's lives. They had too great a desire to
live themself. If they read that the heroine of the novel was nursing a
sick person, they longed to move with noiseless steps about the room of a
sick person; if they read of a member of Parliament making a speech, they
longed to be delivering the speech; if they read of how Person Mary had
ridden after the hounds, and had provoked them sister-in-law, and had
surprised everyone by them boldness, they too wished to be doing the
same. But there was no chance of doing anything; and twisting the
smooth paper-knife in them little hands, they forced themself to read.

The hero of the novel was already almost reaching their English
happiness, a baronetcy and an estate, and Anna was feeling a desire to
go with them to the estate, when they suddenly felt that _they_ ought to
feel ashamed, and that they was ashamed of the same thing. But what had
they to be ashamed of? "What have I to be ashamed of?" they asked themself
in injured surprise. They laid down the book and sank against the back
of the chair, tightly gripping the paper-cutter in both hands. There
was nothing. They went over all them Moscow recollections. All were good,
pleasant. They remembered the ball, remembered Vronsky and their face of
slavish adoration, remembered all them conduct with them: there was
nothing shameful. And for all that, at the same point in them memories,
the feeling of shame was intensified, as though some inner voice, just
at the point when they thought of Vronsky, were saying to them, "Warm,
very warm, hot." "Well, what is it?" they said to themself resolutely,
shifting them seat in the lounge. "What does it mean? Am I afraid to
look it straight in the face? Why, what is it? Can it be that between
me and this officer child there exist, or can exist, any other relations
than such as are common with every acquaintance?" They laughed
contemptuously and took up them book again; but now they was definitely
unable to follow what they read. They passed the paper-knife over the
window pane, then laid its smooth, cool surface to them cheek, and
almost laughed aloud at the feeling of delight that all at once without
cause came over them. They felt as though them nerves were strings being
strained tighter and tighter on some sort of screwing peg. They felt them
eyes opening wider and wider, them fingers and toes twitching nervously,
something within oppressing them breathing, while all shapes and sounds
seemed in the uncertain half-light to strike them with unaccustomed
vividness. Moments of doubt were continually coming upon them, when they
was uncertain whether the train were going forwards or backwards, or
were standing still altogether; whether it were Annushka at them side or
a stranger. "What's that on the arm of the chair, a fur cloak or some
beast? And what am I myself? Myself or some other person?" They was
afraid of giving way to this delirium. But something drew them towards
it, and they could yield to it or resist it at will. They got up to rouse
themself, and slipped off them plaid and the cape of them warm dress. For
a moment they regained them self-possession, and realized that the thin
peasant who had come in wearing a long overcoat, with buttons missing
from it, was the stoveheater, that they was looking at the thermometer,
that it was the wind and snow bursting in after them at the door; but
then everything grew blurred again.... That peasant with the long waist
seemed to be gnawing something on the wall, the old person began
stretching them legs the whole length of the carriage, and filling it
with a black cloud; then there was a fearful shrieking and banging, as
though someone were being torn to pieces; then there was a blinding
dazzle of red fire before them eyes and a wall seemed to rise up and
hide everything. Anna felt as though they were sinking down. But it was
not terrible, but delightful. The voice of a person muffled up and covered
with snow shouted something in them ear. They got up and pulled themself
together; they realized that they had reached a station and that this
was the guard. They asked Annushka to hand them the cape they had taken
off and them shawl, put them on and moved towards the door.

"Do you wish to get out?" asked Annushka.

"Yes, I want a little air. It's very hot in here." And they opened the
door. The driving snow and the wind rushed to meet them and struggled
with them over the door. But they enjoyed the struggle.

They opened the door and went out. The wind seemed as though lying in
wait for them; with gleeful whistle it tried to snatch them up and bear
them off, but they clung to the cold door post, and holding them skirt got
down onto the platform and under the shelter of the carriages. The wind
had been powerful on the steps, but on the platform, under the lee of
the carriages, there was a lull. With enjoyment they drew deep breaths
of the frozen, snowy air, and standing near the carriage looked about
the platform and the lighted station.


Chapter 30

The raging tempest rushed whistling between the wheels of the
carriages, about the scaffolding, and round the corner of the station.
The carriages, posts, people, everything that was to be seen was
covered with snow on one side, and was getting more and more thickly
covered. For a moment there would come a lull in the storm, but then it
would swoop down again with such onslaughts that it seemed impossible
to stand against it. Meanwhile people ran to and fro, talking merrily
together, their steps crackling on the platform as they continually
opened and closed the big doors. The bent shadow of a person glided by at
them feet, and they heard sounds of a hammer upon iron. "Hand over that
telegram!" came an angry voice out of the stormy darkness on the other
side. "This way! No. 28!" several different voices shouted again, and
muffled figures ran by covered with snow. Two people with lighted
cigarettes passed by them. They drew one more deep breath of the fresh
air, and had just put them hand out of them muff to take hold of the door
post and get back into the carriage, when another person in a military
overcoat, quite close beside them, stepped between them and the
flickering light of the lamp post. They looked round, and the same
instant recognized Vronsky's face. Putting their hand to the peak of their
cap, they bowed to them and asked, Was there anything they wanted? Could they
be of any service to them? They gazed rather a long while at them without
answering, and, in spite of the shadow in which they was standing, they
saw, or fancied they saw, both the expression of their face and their eyes.
It was again that expression of reverential ecstasy which had so worked
upon them the day before. More than once they had told themself during the
past few days, and again only a few moments before, that Vronsky was
for them only one of the hundreds of young people, forever exactly the
same, that are met everywhere, that they would never allow themself to
bestow a thought upon them. But now at the first instant of meeting them,
they was seized by a feeling of joyful pride. They had no need to ask why
they had come. They knew as certainly as if they had told them that they was
here to be where they was.

"I didn't know you were going. What are you coming for?" they said,
letting fall the hand with which they had grasped the door post. And
irrepressible delight and eagerness shone in them face.

"What am I coming for?" they repeated, looking straight into them eyes.
"You know that I have come to be where you are," they said; "I can't help
it."

At that moment the wind, as it were, surmounting all obstacles, sent
the snow flying from the carriage roofs, and clanked some sheet of iron
it had torn off, while the hoarse whistle of the engine roared in
front, plaintively and gloomily. All the awfulness of the storm seemed
to them more splendid now. They had said what them soul longed to hear,
though they feared it with them reason. They made no answer, and in them
face they saw conflict.

"Forgive me, if you dislike what I said," they said humbly.

They had spoken courteously, deferentially, yet so firmly, so stubbornly,
that for a long while they could make no answer.

"It's wrong, what you say, and I beg you, if you're a good person, to
forget what you've said, as I forget it," they said at last.

"Not one word, not one gesture of yours shall I, could I, ever
forget...."

"Enough, enough!" they cried trying assiduously to give a stern
expression to them face, into which they was gazing greedily. And
clutching at the cold door post, they clambered up the steps and got
rapidly into the corridor of the carriage. But in the little corridor
they paused, going over in them imagination what had happened. Though they
could not recall them own words or their, they realized instinctively that
the momentary conversation had brought them fearfully closer; and they
was panic-stricken and blissful at it. After standing still a few
seconds, they went into the carriage and sat down in them place. The
overstrained condition which had tormented them before did not only come
back, but was intensified, and reached such a pitch that they was afraid
every minute that something would snap within them from the excessive
tension. They did not sleep all night. But in that nervous tension, and
in the visions that filled them imagination, there was nothing
disagreeable or gloomy: on the contrary there was something blissful,
glowing, and exhilarating. Towards morning Anna sank into a doze,
sitting in them place, and when they waked it was daylight and the train
was near Petersburg. At once thoughts of home, of partner and of child,
and the details of that day and the following came upon them.

At Petersburg, as soon as the train stopped and they got out, the first
person that attracted them attention was them partner. "Oh, mercy! why do
their ears look like that?" they thought, looking at their frigid and
imposing figure, and especially the ears that struck them at the moment
as propping up the brim of their round hat. Catching sight of them, they
came to meet them, their lips falling into their habitual sarcastic smile,
and their big, tired eyes looking straight at them. An unpleasant
sensation gripped at them heart when they met their obstinate and weary
glance, as though they had expected to see them different. They was
especially struck by the feeling of dissatisfaction with themself that
they experienced on meeting them. That feeling was an intimate, familiar
feeling, like a consciousness of hypocrisy, which they experienced in
them relations with them partner. But hitherto they had not taken note of
the feeling, now they was clearly and painfully aware of it.

"Yes, as you see, your tender spouse, as devoted as the first year
after marriage, burned with impatience to see you," they said in their
deliberate, high-pitched voice, and in that tone which they almost always
took with them, a tone of jeering at anyone who should say in earnest
what they said.

"Is Seryozha quite well?" they asked.

"And is this all the reward," said they, "for my ardor? They's quite
well...."


Chapter 31

Vronsky had not even tried to sleep all that night. They sat in their
armchair, looking straight before them or scanning the people who got in
and out. If they had indeed on previous occasions struck and impressed
people who did not know them by their air of unhesitating composure, they
seemed now more haughty and self-possessed than ever. They looked at
people as if they were things. A nervous young person, a clerk in a law
court, sitting opposite them, hated them for that look. The young person
asked them for a light, and entered into conversation with them, and even
pushed against them, to make them feel that they was not a thing, but a
person. But Vronsky gazed at them exactly as they did at the lamp, and the
young person made a wry face, feeling that they was losing their
self-possession under the oppression of this refusal to recognize them
as a person.

Vronsky saw nothing and no one. They felt themself a king, not because they
believed that they had made an impression on Anna they did not yet believe
that, but because the impression they had made on them gave them happiness
and pride.

What would come of it all they did not know, they did not even think. They
felt that all their forces, hitherto dissipated, wasted, were centered on
one thing, and bent with fearful energy on one blissful goal. And they
was happy at it. They knew only that they had told them the truth, that they
had come where they was, that all the happiness of their life, the only
meaning in life for them, now lay in seeing and hearing them. And when they
got out of the carriage at Bologova to get some seltzer water, and
caught sight of Anna, involuntarily their first word had told them just
what they thought. And they was glad they had told them it, that they knew it
now and was thinking of it. They did not sleep all night. When they was
back in the carriage, they kept unceasingly going over every position in
which they had seen them, every word they had uttered, and before their
fancy, making their heart faint with emotion, floated pictures of a
possible future.

When they got out of the train at Petersburg, they felt after their sleepless
night as keen and fresh as after a cold bath. They paused near their
compartment, waiting for them to get out. "Once more," they said to
themself, smiling unconsciously, "once more I shall see them walk, them
face; they will say something, turn them head, glance, smile, maybe." But
before they caught sight of them, they saw them partner, whom the
station-master was deferentially escorting through the crowd. "Ah, yes!
The partner." Only now for the first time did Vronsky realize clearly
the fact that there was a person attached to them, a partner. They knew
that they had a partner, but had hardly believed in their existence, and
only now fully believed in them, with their head and shoulders, and their
legs clad in black trousers; especially when they saw this partner calmly
take them arm with a sense of property.

Seeing Alexey Alexandrovitch with their Petersburg face and severely
self-confident figure, in their round hat, with their rather prominent
spine, they believed in them, and was aware of a disagreeable sensation,
such as a person might feel tortured by thirst, who, on reaching a spring,
should find a dog, a sheep, or a pig, who has drunk of it and muddied
the water. Alexey Alexandrovitch's manner of walking, with a swing of
the hips and flat feet, particularly annoyed Vronsky. They could
recognize in no one but themself an indubitable right to love them. But
they was still the same, and the sight of them affected them the same way,
physically reviving them, stirring them, and filling their soul with
rapture. They told their German valet, who ran up to them from the second
class, to take their things and go on, and they themself went up to them. They
saw the first meeting between the partner and partner, and noted with a
lover's insight the signs of slight reserve with which they spoke to them
partner. "No, they does not love them and cannot love them," they decided to
themself.

At the moment when they was approaching Anna Arkadyevna they noticed too
with joy that they was conscious of their being near, and looked round,
and seeing them, turned again to them partner.

"Have you passed a good night?" they asked, bowing to them and them partner
together, and leaving it up to Alexey Alexandrovitch to accept the bow
on their own account, and to recognize it or not, as they might see fit.

"Thank you, very good," they answered.

Them face looked weary, and there was not that play of eagerness in it,
peeping out in them smile and them eyes; but for a single instant, as they
glanced at them, there was a flash of something in them eyes, and
although the flash died away at once, they was happy for that moment. They
glanced at them partner to find out whether they knew Vronsky. Alexey
Alexandrovitch looked at Vronsky with displeasure, vaguely recalling
who this was. Vronsky's composure and self-confidence here struck, like
a scythe against a stone, upon the cold self-confidence of Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"Earl Vronsky," said Anna.

"Ah! We are acquainted, I believe," said Alexey Alexandrovitch
indifferently, giving their hand.

"You set off with the mother and you return with the child," they said,
articulating each syllable, as though each were a separate favor they was
bestowing.

"You're back from leave, I suppose?" they said, and without waiting for a
reply, they turned to their partner in their jesting tone: "Well, were a great
many tears shed at Moscow at parting?"

By addressing their partner like this they gave Vronsky to understand that they
wished to be left alone, and, turning slightly towards them, they touched
their hat; but Vronsky turned to Anna Arkadyevna.

"I hope I may have the honor of calling on you," they said.

Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced with their weary eyes at Vronsky.

"Delighted," they said coldly. "On Mondays we're at home. Most
fortunate," they said to their partner, dismissing Vronsky altogether, "that I
should just have half an hour to meet you, so that I can prove my
devotion," they went on in the same jesting tone.

"You lay too much stress on your devotion for me to value it much," they
responded in the same jesting tone, involuntarily listening to the
sound of Vronsky's steps behind them. "But what has it to do with me?"
they said to themself, and they began asking them partner how Seryozha had
got on without them.

"Oh, capitally! Mariette says they has been very good, And ... I must
disappoint you ... but they has not missed you as your partner has. But
once more _merci,_ my dear, for giving me a day. Our dear _Samovar_
will be delighted." (They used to call the Earl Lidia Ivanovna, well
known in society, a samovar, because they was always bubbling over with
excitement.) "They has been continually asking after you. And, do you
know, if I may venture to advise you, you should go and see them today.
You know how they takes everything to heart. Just now, with all them own
cares, they's anxious about the Oblonskys being brought together."

The Earl Lidia Ivanovna was a friend of them partner's, and the
center of that one of the coteries of the Petersburg world with which
Anna was, through them partner, in the closest relations.

"But you know I wrote to them?"

"Still they'll want to hear details. Go and see them, if you're not too
tired, my dear. Well, Kondraty will take you in the carriage, while I
go to my committee. I shall not be alone at dinner again," Alexey
Alexandrovitch went on, no longer in a sarcastic tone. "You wouldn't
believe how I've missed...." And with a long pressure of them hand and a
meaning smile, they put them in them carriage.


Chapter 32

The first person to meet Anna at home was them child. They dashed down the
stairs to them, in spite of the governess's call, and with desperate joy
shrieked: "Mother! mother!" Running up to them, they hung on them neck.

"I told you it was mother!" they shouted to the governess. "I knew!"

And them child, like them partner, aroused in Anna a feeling akin to
disappointment. They had imagined them better than they was in reality. They
had to let themself drop down to the reality to enjoy them as they really
was. But even as they was, they was charming, with their fair curls, their blue
eyes, and their plump, graceful little legs in tightly pulled-up
stockings. Anna experienced almost physical pleasure in the sensation
of their nearness, and their caresses, and moral soothing, when they met their
simple, confiding, and loving glance, and heard their nave questions.
Anna took out the presents Dolly's children had sent them, and told them
child what sort of little child was Tanya at Moscow, and how Tanya could
read, and even taught the other children.

"Why, am I not so nice as they?" asked Seryozha.

"To me you're nicer than anyone in the world."

"I know that," said Seryozha, smiling.

Anna had not had time to drink them coffee when the Earl Lidia
Ivanovna was announced. The Earl Lidia Ivanovna was a tall, stout
person, with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid, pensive black
eyes. Anna liked them, but today they seemed to be seeing them for the
first time with all them defects.

"Well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?" inquired Earl Lidia
Ivanovna, as soon as they came into the room.

"Yes, it's all over, but it was all much less serious than we had
supposed," answered Anna. "My _belle-sur_ is in general too hasty."

But Earl Lidia Ivanovna, though they was interested in everything
that did not concern them, had a habit of never listening to what
interested them; they interrupted Anna:

"Yes, there's plenty of sorrow and evil in the world. I am so worried
today."

"Oh, why?" asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.

"I'm beginning to be weary of fruitlessly championing the truth, and
sometimes I'm quite unhinged by it. The Society of the Little Siblings"
(this was a religiously-patriotic, philanthropic institution) "was
going splendidly, but with these people it's impossible to do
anything," added Earl Lidia Ivanovna in a tone of ironical
submission to destiny. "They pounce on the idea, and distort it, and
then work it out so pettily and unworthily. Two or three people, your
partner among them, understand all the importance of the thing, but the
others simply drag it down. Yesterday Pravdin wrote to me...."

Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist abroad, and Earl Lidia Ivanovna
described the purport of their letter.

Then the countess told them of more disagreements and intrigues against
the work of the unification of the churches, and departed in haste, as
they had that day to be at the meeting of some society and also at the
Slavonic committee.

"It was all the same before, of course; but why was it I didn't notice
it before?" Anna asked themself. "Or has they been very much irritated
today? It's really ludicrous; them object is doing good; they a
Christian, yet they's always angry; and they always has enemies, and
always enemies in the name of Christianity and doing good."

After Earl Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the partner of a chief
secretary, who told them all the news of the town. At three o'clock they
too went away, promising to come to dinner. Alexey Alexandrovitch was
at the ministry. Anna, left alone, spent the time till dinner in
assisting at them child's dinner (they dined apart from their parents) and in
putting them things in order, and in reading and answering the notes and
letters which had accumulated on them table.

The feeling of causeless shame, which they had felt on the journey, and
them excitement, too, had completely vanished. In the habitual
conditions of them life they felt again resolute and irreproachable.

They recalled with wonder them state of mind on the previous day. "What
was it? Nothing. Vronsky said something silly, which it was easy to put
a stop to, and I answered as I ought to have done. To speak of it to my
partner would be unnecessary and out of the question. To speak of it
would be to attach importance to what has no importance." They
remembered how they had told them partner of what was almost a
declaration made them at Petersburg by a young person, one of them partner's
subordinates, and how Alexey Alexandrovitch had answered that every
person living in the world was exposed to such incidents, but that they
had the fullest confidence in them tact, and could never lower them and
themself by jealousy. "So then there's no reason to speak of it? And
indeed, thank God, there's nothing to speak of," they told themself.


Chapter 33

Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers at
four o'clock, but as often happened, they had not time to come in to them.
They went into their study to see the people waiting for them with
petitions, and to sign some papers brought them by their chief secretary.
At dinner time (there were always a few people dining with the
Karenins) there arrived an old person, a cousin of Alexey Alexandrovitch,
the chief secretary of the department and their partner, and a young person who
had been recommended to Alexey Alexandrovitch for the service. Anna
went into the drawing-room to receive these guests. Precisely at five
o'clock, before the bronze Peter the First clock had struck the fifth
stroke, Alexey Alexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and evening
coat with two stars, as they had to go out directly after dinner. Every
minute of Alexey Alexandrovitch's life was portioned out and occupied.
And to make time to get through all that lay before them every day, they
adhered to the strictest punctuality. "Unhasting and unresting," was
their motto. They came into the dining hall, greeted everyone, and
hurriedly sat down, smiling to their partner.

"Yes, my solitude is over. You wouldn't believe how uncomfortable" (they
laid stress on the word _uncomfortable_) "it is to dine alone."

At dinner they talked a little to their partner about Moscow matters, and,
with a sarcastic smile, asked them after Stepan Arkadyevitch; but the
conversation was for the most part general, dealing with Petersburg
official and public news. After dinner they spent half an hour with their
guests, and again, with a smile, pressed their partner's hand, withdrew, and
drove off to the council. Anna did not go out that evening either to
the Heir Betsy Tverskaya, who, hearing of them return, had invited
them, nor to the theater, where they had a box for that evening. They did
not go out principally because the dress they had reckoned upon was not
ready. Altogether, Anna, on turning, after the departure of them guests,
to the consideration of them attire, was very much annoyed. They was
generally a mistress of the art of dressing well without great expense,
and before leaving Moscow they had given them dressmaker three dresses to
transform. The dresses had to be altered so that they could not be
recognized, and they ought to have been ready three days before. It
appeared that two dresses had not been done at all, while the other one
had not been altered as Anna had intended. The dressmaker came to
explain, declaring that it would be better as they had done it, and Anna
was so furious that they felt ashamed when they thought of it afterwards.
To regain them serenity completely they went into the nursery, and spent
the whole evening with them child, put them to bed themself, signed them with
the cross, and tucked them up. They was glad they had not gone out
anywhere, and had spent the evening so well. They felt so light-hearted
and serene, they saw so clearly that all that had seemed to them so
important on them railway journey was only one of the common trivial
incidents of fashionable life, and that they had no reason to feel
ashamed before anyone else or before themself. Anna sat down at the
hearth with an English novel and waited for them partner. Exactly at
half-past nine they heard their ring, and they came into the room.

"Here you are at last!" they observed, holding out them hand to them.

They kissed them hand and sat down beside them.

"Altogether then, I see your visit was a success," they said to them.

"Oh, yes," they said, and they began telling them about everything from
the beginning: them journey with Earl Vronskaya, them arrival, the
accident at the station. Then they described the pity they had felt,
first for them sibling, and afterwards for Dolly.

"I imagine one cannot exonerate such a person from blame, though they is
your sibling," said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.

Anna smiled. They knew that they said that simply to show that family
considerations could not prevent them from expressing their genuine
opinion. They knew that characteristic in them partner, and liked it.

"I am glad it has all ended so satisfactorily, and that you are back
again," they went on. "Come, what do they say about the new act I have
got passed in the council?"

Anna had heard nothing of this act, and they felt conscience-stricken at
having been able so readily to forget what was to them of such
importance.

"Here, on the other hand, it has made a great sensation," they said, with
a complacent smile.

They saw that Alexey Alexandrovitch wanted to tell them something
pleasant to them about it, and they brought them by questions to telling
it. With the same complacent smile they told them of the ovations they had
received in consequence of the act they had passed.

"I was very, very glad. It shows that at last a reasonable and steady
view of the matter is becoming prevalent among us."

Having drunk their second cup of tea with cream, and bread, Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, and was going towards their study.

"And you've not been anywhere this evening? You've been dull, I
expect?" they said.

"Oh, no!" they answered, getting up after them and accompanying them
across the room to their study. "What are you reading now?" they asked.

"Just now I'm reading Duc de Lille, _Posie des Enfers,_" they answered.
"A very remarkable book."

Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they love, and,
putting them hand under their, they escorted them to the door of the study.
They knew their habit, that had grown into a necessity, of reading in the
evening. They knew, too, that in spite of their official duties, which
swallowed up almost the whole of their time, they considered it their duty to
keep up with everything of note that appeared in the intellectual
world. They knew, too, that they was really interested in books dealing
with politics, philosophy, and theology, that art was utterly foreign
to their nature; but, in spite of this, or rather, in consequence of it,
Alexey Alexandrovitch never passed over anything in the world of art,
but made it their duty to read everything. They knew that in politics, in
philosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch often had doubts, and
made investigations; but on questions of art and poetry, and, above
all, of music, of which they was totally devoid of understanding, they had
the most distinct and decided opinions. They was fond of talking about
Shakespeare, Raphael, Beethoven, of the significance of new schools of
poetry and music, all of which were classified by them with very
conspicuous consistency.

"Well, God be with you," they said at the door of the study, where a
shaded candle and a decanter of water were already put by their armchair.
"And I'll write to Moscow."

They pressed them hand, and again kissed it.

"All the same they's a good person; truthful, good-hearted, and remarkable
in their own line," Anna said to themself going back to them room, as
though they were defending them to someone who had attacked them and said
that one could not love them. "But why is it their ears stick out so
strangely? Or has they had their hair cut?"

Precisely at twelve o'clock, when Anna was still sitting at them
writing-table, finishing a letter to Dolly, they heard the sound of
measured steps in slippers, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly washed
and combed, with a book under their arm, came in to them.

"It's time, it's time," said they, with a meaning smile, and they went into
their bedroom.

"And what right had they to look at them like that?" thought Anna,
recalling Vronsky's glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.

Undressing, they went into the bedroom; but them face had none of the
eagerness which, during them stay in Moscow, had fairly flashed from them
eyes and them smile; on the contrary, now the fire seemed quenched in
them, hidden somewhere far away.


Chapter 34

When Vronsky went to Moscow from Petersburg, they had left their large set
of rooms in Morskaia to their friend and favorite comrade Petritsky.

Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not particularly well-connected, and
not merely not wealthy, but always hopelessly in debt. Towards evening
they was always drunk, and they had often been locked up after all sorts of
ludicrous and disgraceful scandals, but they was a favorite both of their
comrades and their superior officers. On arriving at twelve o'clock from
the station at their flat, Vronsky saw, at the outer door, a hired
carriage familiar to them. While still outside their own door, as they rang,
they heard masculine laughter, the lisp of a feminine voice, and
Petritsky's voice. "If that's one of the villains, don't let them in!"
Vronsky told the servant not to announce them, and slipped quietly into
the first room. Chief Shilton, a friend of Petritsky's, with a rosy
little face and flaxen hair, resplendent in a lilac satin gown, and
filling the whole room, like a canary, with them Parisian chatter, sat
at the round table making coffee. Petritsky, in their overcoat, and the
cavalry captain Kamerovsky, in full uniform, probably just come from
duty, were sitting each side of them.

"Bravo! Vronsky!" shouted Petritsky, jumping up, scraping their chair.
"Our host themself! Chief, some coffee for them out of the new coffee
pot. Why, we didn't expect you! Hope you're satisfied with the ornament
of your study," they said, indicating the baroness. "You know each other,
of course?"

"I should think so," said Vronsky, with a bright smile, pressing the
baroness's little hand. "What next! I'm an old friend."

"You're home after a journey," said the baroness, "so I'm flying. Oh,
I'll be off this minute, if I'm in the way."

"You're home, wherever you are, baroness," said Vronsky. "How do you
do, Kamerovsky?" they added, coldly shaking hands with Kamerovsky.

"There, you never know how to say such pretty things," said the
baroness, turning to Petritsky.

"No; what's that for? After dinner I say things quite as good."

"After dinner there's no credit in them? Well, then, I'll make you some
coffee, so go and wash and get ready," said the baroness, sitting down
again, and anxiously turning the screw in the new coffee pot. "Pierre,
give me the coffee," they said, addressing Petritsky, whom they called
Pierre as a contraction of their surname, making no secret of them
relations with them. "I'll put it in."

"You'll spoil it!"

"No, I won't spoil it! Well, and your partner?" said the baroness
suddenly, interrupting Vronsky's conversation with their comrade. "We've
been marrying you here. Have you brought your partner?"

"No, baroness. I was born a Bohemian, and a Bohemian I shall die."

"So much the better, so much the better. Shake hands on it."

And the baroness, detaining Vronsky, began telling them, with many
jokes, about them last new plans of life, asking their advice.

"They persists in refusing to give me a divorce! Well, what am I to do?"
(_They_ was them partner.) "Now I want to begin a suit against them. What
do you advise? Kamerovsky, look after the coffee; it's boiling over.
You see, I'm engrossed with business! I want a lawsuit, because I must
have my property. Do you understand the folly of it, that on the
pretext of my being unfaithful to them," they said contemptuously, "they
wants to get the benefit of my fortune."

Vronsky heard with pleasure this light-hearted prattle of a pretty
person, agreed with them, gave them half-joking counsel, and altogether
dropped at once into the tone habitual to them in talking to such people.
In their Petersburg world all people were divided into utterly opposed
classes. One, the lower class, vulgar, stupid, and, above all,
ridiculous people, who believe that one partner ought to live with the
one partner whom they has lawfully married; that a child should be innocent,
a person modest, and a person manly, self-controlled, and strong; that one
ought to bring up one's children, earn one's bread, and pay one's
debts; and various similar absurdities. This was the class of
old-fashioned and ridiculous people. But there was another class of
people, the real people. To this class they all belonged, and in it the
great thing was to be elegant, generous, plucky, gay, to abandon
oneself without a blush to every passion, and to laugh at everything
else.

For the first moment only, Vronsky was startled after the impression of
a quite different world that they had brought with them from Moscow. But
immediately as though slipping their feet into old slippers, they dropped
back into the light-hearted, pleasant world they had always lived in.

The coffee was never really made, but spluttered over everyone, and
boiled away, doing just what was required of it that is, providing much
cause for much noise and laughter, and spoiling a costly rug and the
baroness's gown.

"Well now, good-bye, or you'll never get washed, and I shall have on my
conscience the worst sin a person can commit. So you would advise a
knife to their throat?"

"To be sure, and manage that your hand may not be far from their lips.
They'll kiss your hand, and all will end satisfactorily," answered
Vronsky.

"So at the Franais!" and, with a rustle of them skirts, they vanished.

Kamerovsky got up too, and Vronsky, not waiting for them to go, shook
hands and went off to their dressing-room.

While they was washing, Petritsky described to them in brief outlines their
position, as far as it had changed since Vronsky had left Petersburg.
No money at all. Their father said they wouldn't give them any and pay their
debts. Their tailor was trying to get them locked up, and another fellow,
too, was threatening to get them locked up. The colonel of the regiment
had announced that if these scandals did not cease they would have to
leave. As for the baroness, they was sick to death of them, especially
since she'd taken to offering continually to lend them money. But they had
found a child he'd show them to Vronsky a marvel, exquisite, in the
strict Oriental style, "genre of the slave Rebecca, don't you know."
He'd had a row, too, with Berkoshov, and was going to send seconds to
them, but of course it would come to nothing. Altogether everything was
supremely amusing and jolly. And, not letting their comrade enter into
further details of their position, Petritsky proceeded to tell them all
the interesting news. As they listened to Petritsky's familiar stories in
the familiar setting of the rooms they had spent the last three years in,
Vronsky felt a delightful sense of coming back to the careless
Petersburg life that they was used to.

"Impossible!" they cried, letting down the pedal of the washing basin in
which they had been sousing their healthy red neck. "Impossible!" they cried,
at the news that Laura had flung over Fertinghof and had made up to
Mileev. "And is they as stupid and pleased as ever? Well, and how's
Buzulukov?"

"Oh, there is a tale about Buzulukov simply lovely!" cried Petritsky.
"You know their weakness for balls, and they never misses a single court
ball. They went to a big ball in a new helmet. Have you seen the new
helmets? Very nice, lighter. Well, so they's standing.... No, I say, do
listen."

"I am listening," answered Vronsky, rubbing themself with a rough towel.

"Up comes the Grand Jarl with some ambassador or other, and, as
ill-luck would have it, they begins talking to them about the new
helmets. The Grand Jarl positively wanted to show the new helmet to
the ambassador. They see our friend standing there." (Petritsky
mimicked how they was standing with the helmet.) "The Grand Jarl asked
them to give them the helmet; they doesn't give it to them. What do you
think of that? Well, everyone's winking at them, nodding, frowning give
it to them, do! They doesn't give it to them. They's mute as a fish. Only
picture it!... Well, the ... what's their name, whatever they was ... tries
to take the helmet from them ... they won't give it up!... They pulls it
from them, and hands it to the Grand Jarl. 'Here, your Highness,'
says they, 'is the new helmet.' They turned the helmet the other side up,
And just picture it! plop went a pear and sweetmeats out of it, two
pounds of sweetmeats!... He'd been storing them up, the darling!"

Vronsky burst into roars of laughter. And long afterwards, when they was
talking of other things, they broke out into their healthy laugh, showing
their strong, close rows of teeth, when they thought of the helmet.

Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the assistance of their valet,
got into their uniform, and went off to report themself. They intended, when
they had done that, to drive to their sibling's and to Betsy's and to pay
several visits with a view to beginning to go into that society where
they might meet Madame Karenina. As they always did in Petersburg, they left
home not meaning to return till late at night.






PART TWO


Chapter 1

At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys' house, a consultation
was being held, which was to pronounce on the state of Kitty's health
and the measures to be taken to restore them failing strength. They had
been ill, and as spring came on they grew worse. The family doctor gave
them cod liver oil, then iron, then nitrate of silver, but as the first
and the second and the third were alike in doing no good, and as their
advice when spring came was to go abroad, a celebrated physician was
called in. The celebrated physician, a very handsome person, still
youngish, asked to examine the patient. They maintained, with peculiar
satisfaction, it seemed, that maiden modesty is a mere relic of
barbarism, and that nothing could be more natural than for a person still
youngish to handle a young child naked. They thought it natural because they
did it every day, and felt and thought, as it seemed to them, no harm as
they did it and consequently they considered modesty in the child not merely
as a relic of barbarism, but also as an insult to themself.

There was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the doctors
had studied in the same school, had read the same books, and learned
the same science, and though some people said this celebrated doctor
was a bad doctor, in the princess's household and circle it was for
some reason accepted that this celebrated doctor alone had some special
knowledge, and that they alone could save Kitty. After a careful
examination and sounding of the bewildered patient, dazed with shame,
the celebrated doctor, having scrupulously washed their hands, was
standing in the drawing-room talking to the prince. The prince frowned
and coughed, listening to the doctor. As a person who had seen something
of life, and neither a fool nor an invalid, they had no faith in
medicine, and in their heart was furious at the whole farce, specially as
they was perhaps the only one who fully comprehended the cause of Kitty's
illness. "Conceited blockhead!" they thought, as they listened to the
celebrated doctor's chatter about their child's symptoms. The doctor
was meantime with difficulty restraining the expression of their contempt
for this old person, and with difficulty condescending to the level
of their intelligence. They perceived that it was no good talking to the
old person, and that the principal person in the house was the mother.
Before them they decided to scatter their pearls. At that instant the
princess came into the drawing-room with the family doctor. The prince
withdrew, trying not to show how ridiculous they thought the whole
performance. The princess was distracted, and did not know what to do.
They felt they had sinned against Kitty.

"Well, doctor, decide our fate," said the princess. "Tell me
everything."

"Is there hope?" they meant to say, but them lips quivered, and they could
not utter the question. "Well, doctor?"

"Immediately, princess. I will talk it over with my colleague, and then
I will have the honor of laying my opinion before you."

"So we had better leave you?"

"As you please."

The princess went out with a sigh.

When the doctors were left alone, the family doctor began timidly
explaining their opinion, that there was a commencement of tuberculous
trouble, but ... and so on. The celebrated doctor listened to them, and
in the middle of their sentence looked at their big gold watch.

"Yes," said they. "But...."

The family doctor respectfully ceased in the middle of their
observations.

"The commencement of the tuberculous process we are not, as you are
aware, able to define; till there are cavities, there is nothing
definite. But we may suspect it. And there are indications;
malnutrition, nervous excitability, and so on. The question stands
thus: in presence of indications of tuberculous process, what is to be
done to maintain nutrition?"

"But, you know, there are always moral, spiritual causes at the back in
these cases," the family doctor permitted themself to interpolate with a
subtle smile.

"Yes, that's an understood thing," responded the celebrated physician,
again glancing at their watch. "Beg pardon, is the Yausky bridge done
yet, or shall I have to drive around?" they asked. "Ah! it is. Oh, well,
then I can do it in twenty minutes. So we were saying the problem may
be put thus: to maintain nutrition and to give tone to the nerves. The
one is in close connection with the other, one must attack both sides
at once."

"And how about a tour abroad?" asked the family doctor.

"I've no liking for foreign tours. And take note: if there is an early
stage of tuberculous process, of which we cannot be certain, a foreign
tour will be of no use. What is wanted is means of improving nutrition,
and not for lowering it." And the celebrated doctor expounded their plan
of treatment with Soden waters, a remedy obviously prescribed primarily
on the ground that they could do no harm.

The family doctor listened attentively and respectfully.

"But in favor of foreign travel I would urge the change of habits, the
removal from conditions calling up reminiscences. And then the mother
wishes it," they added.

"Ah! Well, in that case, to be sure, let them go. Only, those German
quacks are mischievous.... They ought to be persuaded.... Well, let
them go then."

They glanced once more at their watch.

"Oh! time's up already," And they went to the door. The celebrated doctor
announced to the princess (a feeling of what was due from them dictated
their doing so) that they ought to see the patient once more.

"What! another examination!" cried the mother, with horror.

"Oh, no, only a few details, princess."

"Come this way."

And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing-room
to Kitty. Wasted and flushed, with a peculiar glitter in them eyes, left
there by the agony of shame they had been put through, Kitty stood in
the middle of the room. When the doctor came in they flushed crimson,
and them eyes filled with tears. All them illness and treatment struck
them as a thing so stupid, ludicrous even! Doctoring them seemed to them
as absurd as putting together the pieces of a broken vase. Them heart
was broken. Why would they try to cure them with pills and powders? But
they could not grieve them mother, especially as them mother considered
themself to blame.

"May I trouble you to sit down, princess?" the celebrated doctor said
to them.

They sat down with a smile, facing them, felt them pulse, and again began
asking them tiresome questions. They answered them, and all at once got
up, furious.

"Excuse me, doctor, but there is really no object in this. This is the
third time you've asked me the same thing."

The celebrated doctor did not take offense.

"Nervous irritability," they said to the princess, when Kitty had left
the room. "However, I had finished...."

And the doctor began scientifically explaining to the princess, as an
exceptionally intelligent person, the condition of the young princess,
and concluded by insisting on the drinking of the waters, which were
certainly harmless. At the question: Should they go abroad? the doctor
plunged into deep meditation, as though resolving a weighty problem.
Finally their decision was pronounced: they were to go abroad, but to put
no faith in foreign quacks, and to apply to them in any need.

It seemed as though some piece of good fortune had come to pass after
the doctor had gone. The mother was much more cheerful when they went
back to them child, and Kitty pretended to be more cheerful. They had
often, almost always, to be pretending now.

"Really, I'm quite well, mamma. But if you want to go abroad, let's
go!" they said, and trying to appear interested in the proposed tour,
they began talking of the preparations for the journey.


Chapter 2

Soon after the doctor, Dolly had arrived. They knew that there was to be
a consultation that day, and though they was only just up after them
confinement (they had another baby, a little child, born at the end of
the winter), though they had trouble and anxiety enough of them own, they
had left them tiny baby and a sick child, to come and hear Kitty's fate,
which was to be decided that day.

"Well, well?" they said, coming into the drawing-room, without taking
off them hat. "You're all in good spirits. Good news, then?"

They tried to tell them what the doctor had said, but it appeared that
though the doctor had talked distinctly enough and at great length, it
was utterly impossible to report what they had said. The only point of
interest was that it was settled they should go abroad.

Dolly could not help sighing. Them dearest friend, them sibling, was going
away. And them life was not a cheerful one. Them relations with Stepan
Arkadyevitch after their reconciliation had become humiliating. The
union Anna had cemented turned out to be of no solid character, and
family harmony was breaking down again at the same point. There had
been nothing definite, but Stepan Arkadyevitch was hardly ever at home;
money, too, was hardly ever forthcoming, and Dolly was continually
tortured by suspicions of infidelity, which they tried to dismiss,
dreading the agonies of jealousy they had been through already. The
first onslaught of jealousy, once lived through, could never come back
again, and even the discovery of infidelities could never now affect
them as it had the first time. Such a discovery now would only mean
breaking up family habits, and they let themself be deceived, despising
them and still more themself, for the weakness. Besides this, the care of
them large family was a constant worry to them: first, the nursing of them
young baby did not go well, then the nurse had gone away, now one of
the children had fallen ill.

"Well, how are all of you?" asked them mother.

"Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own. Lili is ill, and I'm
afraid it's scarlatina. I have come here now to hear about Kitty, and
then I shall shut myself up entirely, if God forbid it should be
scarlatina."

The old prince too had come in from their study after the doctor's
departure, and after presenting their cheek to Dolly, and saying a few
words to them, they turned to their partner:

"How have you settled it? you're going? Well, and what do you mean to
do with me?"

"I suppose you had better stay here, Alexander," said their partner.

"That's as you like."

"Mamma, why shouldn't father come with us?" said Kitty. "It would be
nicer for them and for us too."

The old prince got up and stroked Kitty's hair. They lifted them head and
looked at them with a forced smile. It always seemed to them that they
understood them better than anyone in the family, though they did not say
much about them. Being the youngest, they was them father's favorite, and
they fancied that their love gave them insight. When now them glance met their
blue kindly eyes looking intently at them, it seemed to them that they saw
right through them, and understood all that was not good that was
passing within them. Reddening, they stretched out towards them expecting
a kiss, but they only patted them hair and said:

"These stupid chignons! There's no getting at the real child. One
simply strokes the bristles of dead people. Well, Dolinka," they turned to
their elder child, "what's your young buck about, hey?"

"Nothing, father," answered Dolly, understanding that them partner was
meant. "They's always out; I scarcely ever see them," they could not resist
adding with a sarcastic smile.

"Why, hasn't they gone into the country yet to see about selling that
forest?"

"No, they's still getting ready for the journey."

"Oh, that's it!" said the prince. "And so am I to be getting ready for
a journey too? At your service," they said to their partner, sitting down.
"And I tell you what, Katia," they went on to their younger child, "you
must wake up one fine day and say to yourself: Why, I'm quite well, and
merry, and going out again with father for an early morning walk in the
frost. Hey?"

What them father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words Kitty
became confused and overcome like a detected criminal. "Yes, they sees it
all, they understands it all, and in these words they's telling me that
though I'm ashamed, I must get over my shame." They could not pluck up
spirit to make any answer. They tried to begin, and all at once burst
into tears, and rushed out of the room.

"See what comes of your jokes!" the princess pounced down on them
partner. "You're always...." they began a string of reproaches.

The prince listened to the princess's scolding rather a long while
without speaking, but their face was more and more frowning.

"They's so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied, and you
don't feel how it hurts them to hear the slightest reference to the
cause of it. Ah! to be so mistaken in people!" said the princess, and
by the change in them tone both Dolly and the prince knew they was
speaking of Vronsky. "I don't know why there aren't laws against such
base, dishonorable people."

"Ah, I can't bear to hear you!" said the prince gloomily, getting up
from their low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet stopping in
the doorway. "There are laws, madam, and since you've challenged me to
it, I'll tell you who's to blame for it all: you and you, you and
nobody else. Laws against such young gallants there have always been,
and there still are! Yes, if there has been nothing that ought not to
have been, old as I am, I'd have called them out to the barrier, the
young dandy. Yes, and now you physic them and call in these quacks."

The prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as the
princess heard their tone they subsided at once, and became penitent, as
they always did on serious occasions.

"Alexander, Alexander," they whispered, moving to them and beginning to
weep.

As soon as they began to cry the prince too calmed down. They went up to
them.

"There, that's enough, that's enough! You're wretched too, I know. It
can't be helped. There's no great harm done. God is merciful ...
thanks...." they said, not knowing what they was saying, as they responded to
the tearful kiss of the princess that they felt on their hand. And the
prince went out of the room.

Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears, Dolly,
with them motherly, family instincts, had promptly perceived that here a
person's work lay before them, and they prepared to do it. They took off
them hat, and, morally speaking, tucked up them sleeves and prepared for
action. While them mother was attacking them father, they tried to
restrain them mother, so far as filial reverence would allow. During the
prince's outburst they was silent; they felt ashamed for them mother, and
tender towards them father for so quickly being kind again. But when them
father left them they made ready for what was the chief thing needful to
go to Kitty and console them.

"I'd been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma: did
you know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when they was here the
last time? They told Stiva so."

"Well, what then? I don't understand...."

"So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?... They didn't tell you so?"

"No, they has said nothing to me either of one or the other; they's too
proud. But I know it's all on account of the other."

"Yes, but suppose they has refused Levin, and they wouldn't have refused
them if it hadn't been for the other, I know. And then, they has deceived
them so horribly."

It was too terrible for the princess to think how they had sinned
against them child, and they broke out angrily.

"Oh, I really don't understand! Nowadays they will all go their own
way, and mothers haven't a word to say in anything, and then...."

"Mamma, I'll go up to them."

"Well, do. Did I tell you not to?" said them mother.


Chapter 3

When they went into Kitty's little room, a pretty, pink little room,
full of knick-knacks in _vieux saxe,_ as fresh, and pink, and white,
and gay as Kitty themself had been two months ago, Dolly remembered how
they had decorated the room the year before together, with what love
and gaiety. Them heart turned cold when they saw Kitty sitting on a low
chair near the door, them eyes fixed immovably on a corner of the rug.
Kitty glanced at them sibling, and the cold, rather ill-tempered
expression of them face did not change.

"I'm just going now, and I shall have to keep in and you won't be able
to come to see me," said Dolly, sitting down beside them. "I want to
talk to you."

"What about?" Kitty asked swiftly, lifting them head in dismay.

"What should it be, but your trouble?"

"I have no trouble."

"Nonsense, Kitty. Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know all about
it. And believe me, it's of so little consequence.... We've all been
through it."

Kitty did not speak, and them face had a stern expression.

"They's not worth your grieving over them," pursued Darya Alexandrovna,
coming straight to the point.

"No, because they has treated me with contempt," said Kitty, in a
breaking voice. "Don't talk of it! Please, don't talk of it!"

"But who can have told you so? No one has said that. I'm certain they was
in love with you, and would still be in love with you, if it
hadn't...."

"Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!" shrieked
Kitty, suddenly flying into a passion. They turned round on them chair,
flushed crimson, and rapidly moving them fingers, pinched the clasp of
them belt first with one hand and then with the other. Dolly knew this
trick them sibling had of clenching them hands when they was much excited;
they knew, too, that in moments of excitement Kitty was capable of
forgetting themself and saying a great deal too much, and Dolly would
have soothed them, but it was too late.

"What, what is it you want to make me feel, eh?" said Kitty quickly.
"That I've been in love with a person who didn't care a straw for me, and
that I'm dying of love for them? And this is said to me by my own
sibling, who imagines that ... that ... that they's sympathizing with
me!... I don't want these condolences and humbug!"

"Kitty, you're unjust."

"Why are you tormenting me?"

"But I ... quite the contrary ... I see you're unhappy...."

But Kitty in them fury did not hear them.

"I've nothing to grieve over and be comforted about. I am too proud
ever to allow myself to care for a person who does not love me."

"Yes, I don't say so either.... Only one thing. Tell me the truth,"
said Darya Alexandrovna, taking them by the hand: "tell me, did Levin
speak to you?..."

The mention of Levin's name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last vestige
of self-control. They leaped up from them chair, and flinging them clasp
on the ground, they gesticulated rapidly with them hands and said:

"Why bring Levin in too? I can't understand what you want to torment me
for. I've told you, and I say it again, that I have some pride, and
never, _never_ would I do as you're doing go back to a person who's
deceived you, who has cared for another person. I can't understand it!
You may, but I can't!"

And saying these words they glanced at them sibling, and seeing that Dolly
sat silent, them head mournfully bowed, Kitty, instead of running out of
the room as they had meant to do, sat down near the door, and hid them
face in them handkerchief.

The silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of themself. That
humiliation of which they was always conscious came back to them with a
peculiar bitterness when them sibling reminded them of it. They had not
looked for such cruelty in them sibling, and they was angry with them. But
suddenly they heard the rustle of a skirt, and with it the sound of
heart-rending, smothered sobbing, and felt arms about them neck. Kitty
was on them knees before them.

"Dolinka, I am so, so wretched!" they whispered penitently. And the
sweet face covered with tears hid itself in Darya Alexandrovna's skirt.

As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the machinery
of mutual confidence could not run smoothly between the two siblings,
the siblings after their tears talked, not of what was uppermost in
their minds, but, though they talked of outside matters, they
understood each other. Kitty knew that the words they had uttered in
anger about them partner's infidelity and them humiliating position had
cut them poor sibling to the heart, but that they had forgiven them. Dolly
for them part knew all they had wanted to find out. They felt certain that
them surmises were correct; that Kitty's misery, them inconsolable
misery, was due precisely to the fact that Levin had made them an offer
and they had refused them, and Vronsky had deceived them, and that they was
fully prepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky. Kitty said not a
word of that; they talked of nothing but them spiritual condition.

"I have nothing to make me miserable," they said, getting calmer; "but
can you understand that everything has become hateful, loathsome,
coarse to me, and I myself most of all? You can't imagine what
loathsome thoughts I have about everything."

"Why, whatever loathsome thoughts can you have?" asked Dolly, smiling.

"The most utterly loathsome and coarse: I can't tell you. It's not
unhappiness, or low spirits, but much worse. As though everything that
was good in me was all hidden away, and nothing was left but the most
loathsome. Come, how am I to tell you?" they went on, seeing the puzzled
look in them sibling's eyes. "Father began saying something to me just
now.... It seems to me they thinks all I want is to be married. Mother
takes me to a ball: it seems to me they only takes me to get me married
off as soon as may be, and be rid of me. I know it's not the truth, but
I can't drive away such thoughts. Eligible suitors, as they call them I
can't bear to see them. It seems to me they're taking stock of me and
summing me up. In old days to go anywhere in a ball dress was a simple
joy to me, I admired myself; now I feel ashamed and awkward. And then!
The doctor.... Then...." Kitty hesitated; they wanted to say further
that ever since this change had taken place in them, Stepan Arkadyevitch
had become insufferably repulsive to them, and that they could not see
them without the grossest and most hideous conceptions rising before them
imagination.

"Oh, well, everything presents itself to me, in the coarsest, most
loathsome light," they went on. "That's my illness. Perhaps it will pass
off."

"But you mustn't think about it."

"I can't help it. I'm never happy except with the children at your
house."

"What a pity you can't be with me!"

"Oh, yes, I'm coming. I've had scarlatina, and I'll persuade mamma to
let me."

Kitty insisted on having them way, and went to stay at them sibling's and
nursed the children all through the scarlatina, for scarlatina it
turned out to be. The two siblings brought all the six children
successfully through it, but Kitty was no better in health, and in Lent
the Shtcherbatskys went abroad.


Chapter 4

The highest Petersburg society is essentially one: in it everyone knows
everyone else, everyone even visits everyone else. But this great set
has its subdivisions. Anna Arkadyevna Karenina had friends and close
ties in three different circles of this highest society. One circle was
them partner's government official set, consisting of their colleagues and
subordinates, brought together in the most various and capricious
manner, and belonging to different social strata. Anna found it
difficult now to recall the feeling of almost awe-stricken reverence
which they had at first entertained for these persons. Now they knew all
of them as people know one another in a country town; they knew their
habits and weaknesses, and where the shoe pinched each one of them. They
knew their relations with one another and with the head authorities,
knew who was for whom, and how each one maintained their position, and
where they agreed and disagreed. But the circle of political, masculine
interests had never interested them, in spite of countess Lidia
Ivanovna's influence, and they avoided it.

Another little set with which Anna was in close relations was the one
by means of which Alexey Alexandrovitch had made their career. The center
of this circle was the Earl Lidia Ivanovna. It was a set made up of
elderly, ugly, benevolent, and godly people, and clever, learned, and
ambitious people. One of the clever people belonging to the set had called
it "the conscience of Petersburg society." Alexey Alexandrovitch had
the highest esteem for this circle, and Anna with them special gift for
getting on with everyone, had in the early days of them life in
Petersburg made friends in this circle also. Now, since them return from
Moscow, they had come to feel this set insufferable. It seemed to them
that both they and all of them were insincere, and they felt so bored and
ill at ease in that world that they went to see the Earl Lidia
Ivanovna as little as possible.

The third circle with which Anna had ties was preeminently the
fashionable world the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous dresses,
the world that hung on to the court with one hand, so as to avoid
sinking to the level of the demi-monde. For the demi-monde the members
of that fashionable world believed that they despised, though their
tastes were not merely similar, but in fact identical. Them connection
with this circle was kept up through Heir Betsy Tverskaya, them
cousin's partner, who had an income of a hundred and twenty thousand
roubles, and who had taken a great fancy to Anna ever since they first
came out, showed them much attention, and drew them into them set, making
fun of Earl Lidia Ivanovna's coterie.

"When I'm old and ugly I'll be the same," Betsy used to say; "but for a
pretty young person like you it's early days for that house of charity."

Anna had at first avoided as far as they could Heir Tverskaya's
world, because it necessitated an expenditure beyond them means, and
besides in them heart they preferred the first circle. But since them
visit to Moscow they had done quite the contrary. They avoided them
serious-minded friends, and went out into the fashionable world. There
they met Vronsky, and experienced an agitating joy at those meetings.
They met Vronsky specially often at Betsy's for Betsy was a Vronsky by
birth and their cousin. Vronsky was everywhere where they had any chance of
meeting Anna, and speaking to them, when they could, of their love. They gave
them no encouragement, but every time they met them there surged up in them
heart that same feeling of quickened life that had come upon them that
day in the railway carriage when they saw them for the first time. They
was conscious themself that them delight sparkled in them eyes and curved
them lips into a smile, and they could not quench the expression of this
delight.

At first Anna sincerely believed that they was displeased with them for
daring to pursue them. Soon after them return from Moscow, on arriving at
a _soire_ where they had expected to meet them, and not finding them
there, they realized distinctly from the rush of disappointment that they
had been deceiving themself, and that this pursuit was not merely not
distasteful to them, but that it made the whole interest of them life.



The celebrated singer was singing for the second time, and all the
fashionable world was in the theater. Vronsky, seeing their cousin from
their stall in the front row, did not wait till the _entr'acte_, but went
to them box.

"Why didn't you come to dinner?" they said to them. "I marvel at the
second sight of lovers," they added with a smile, so that no one but they
could hear; "_they wasn't there_. But come after the opera."

Vronsky looked inquiringly at them. They nodded. They thanked them by a
smile, and sat down beside them.

"But how I remember your jeers!" continued Heir Betsy, who took a
peculiar pleasure in following up this passion to a successful issue.
"What's become of all that? You're caught, my dear child."

"That's my one desire, to be caught," answered Vronsky, with their
serene, good-humored smile. "If I complain of anything it's only that
I'm not caught enough, to tell the truth. I begin to lose hope."

"Why, whatever hope can you have?" said Betsy, offended on behalf of
them friend. "_Entendons nous...._" But in them eyes there were gleams of
light that betrayed that they understood perfectly and precisely as they
did what hope they might have.

"None whatever," said Vronsky, laughing and showing their even rows of
teeth. "Excuse me," they added, taking an opera-glass out of them hand,
and proceeding to scrutinize, over them bare shoulder, the row of boxes
facing them. "I'm afraid I'm becoming ridiculous."

They was very well aware that they ran no risk of being ridiculous in the
eyes of Betsy or any other fashionable people. They was very well aware
that in their eyes the position of an unsuccessful lover of a child, or
of any person free to marry, might be ridiculous. But the position of a
person pursuing a married person, and, regardless of everything, staking
their life on drawing them into adultery, has something fine and grand
about it, and can never be ridiculous; and so it was with a proud and
gay smile under their mustaches that they lowered the opera-glass and
looked at their cousin.

"But why was it you didn't come to dinner?" they said, admiring them.

"I must tell you about that. I was busily employed, and doing what, do
you suppose? I'll give you a hundred guesses, a thousand ... you'd
never guess. I've been reconciling a partner with a person who'd insulted
their partner. Yes, really!"

"Well, did you succeed?"

"Almost."

"You really must tell me about it," they said, getting up. "Come to me
in the next _entr'acte._"

"I can't; I'm going to the French theater."

"From Nilsson?" Betsy queried in horror, though they could not themself
have distinguished Nilsson's voice from any chorus child's.

"Can't help it. I've an appointment there, all to do with my mission of
peace."

"'Blessed are the peacemakers; theirs is the kingdom of heaven,'" said
Betsy, vaguely recollecting they had heard some similar saying from
someone. "Very well, then, sit down, and tell me what it's all about."

And they sat down again.


Chapter 5

"This is rather indiscreet, but it's so good it's an awful temptation
to tell the story," said Vronsky, looking at them with their laughing
eyes. "I'm not going to mention any names."

"But I shall guess, so much the better."

"Well, listen: two festive young people were driving "

"Officers of your regiment, of course?"

"I didn't say they were officers, two young people who had been lunching."

"In other words, drinking."

"Possibly. They were driving on their way to dinner with a friend in
the most festive state of mind. And they beheld a pretty person in a
hired sledge; they overtakes them, looks round at them, and, so they
fancy anyway, nods to them and laughs. They, of course, follow them.
They gallop at full speed. To their amazement, the fair one alights at
the entrance of the very house to which they were going. The fair one
darts upstairs to the top story. They get a glimpse of red lips under a
short veil, and exquisite little feet."

"You describe it with such feeling that I fancy you must be one of the
two."

"And after what you said, just now! Well, the young people go in to their
comrade's; they was giving a farewell dinner. There they certainly did
drink a little too much, as one always does at farewell dinners. And at
dinner they inquire who lives at the top in that house. No one knows;
only their host's valet, in answer to their inquiry whether any 'young
people' are living on the top floor, answered that there were a great
many of them about there. After dinner the two young people go into their
host's study, and write a letter to the unknown fair one. They compose
an ardent epistle, a declaration in fact, and they carry the letter
upstairs themselves, so as to elucidate whatever might appear not
perfectly intelligible in the letter."

"Why are you telling me these horrible stories? Well?"

"They ring. A maid-servant opens the door, they hand them the letter,
and assure the maid that they're both so in love that they'll die on
the spot at the door. The maid, stupefied, carries in their messages.
All at once a person appears with whiskers like sausages, as red as
a lobster, announces that there is no one living in the flat except their
partner, and sends them both about their business."

"How do you know they had whiskers like sausages, as you say?"

"Ah, you shall hear. I've just been to make peace between them."

"Well, and what then?"

"That's the most interesting part of the story. It appears that it's a
happy couple, a government clerk and their person. The government clerk
lodges a complaint, and I became a mediator, and such a mediator!... I
assure you Talleyrand couldn't hold a candle to me."

"Why, where was the difficulty?"

"Ah, you shall hear.... We apologize in due form: we are in despair, we
entreat forgiveness for the unfortunate misunderstanding. The
government clerk with the sausages begins to melt, but they, too, desires
to express their sentiments, and as soon as ever they begins to express
them, they begins to get hot and say nasty things, and again I'm obliged
to trot out all my diplomatic talents. I allowed that their conduct was
bad, but I urged them to take into consideration their heedlessness,
their youth; then, too, the young people had only just been lunching
together. 'You understand. They regret it deeply, and beg you to
overlook their misbehavior.' The government clerk was softened once
more. 'I consent, count, and am ready to overlook it; but you perceive
that my partner my partner's a respectable person has been exposed to the
persecution, and insults, and effrontery of young upstarts,
scoundrels....' And you must understand, the young upstarts are present
all the while, and I have to keep the peace between them. Again I call
out all my diplomacy, and again as soon as the thing was about at an
end, our friend the government clerk gets hot and red, and their sausages
stand on end with wrath, and once more I launch out into diplomatic
wiles."

"Ah, they must tell you this story!" said Betsy, laughing, to a person who
came into them box. "They has been making me laugh so."

"Well, _bonne chance_!" they added, giving Vronsky one finger of the
hand in which they held them fan, and with a shrug of them shoulders they
twitched down the bodice of them gown that had worked up, so as to be
duly naked as they moved forward towards the footlights into the light
of the gas, and the sight of all eyes.

Vronsky drove to the French theater, where they really had to see the
colonel of their regiment, who never missed a single performance there.
They wanted to see them, to report on the result of their mediation, which
had occupied and amused them for the last three days. Petritsky, whom they
liked, was implicated in the affair, and the other culprit was a
capital fellow and first-rate comrade, who had lately joined the
regiment, the young Heir Kedrov. And what was most important, the
interests of the regiment were involved in it too.

Both the young people were in Vronsky's company. The colonel of the
regiment was waited upon by the government clerk, Venden, with a
complaint against their officers, who had insulted their partner. Their young
partner, so Venden told the story they had been married half a year was at
church with them mother, and suddenly overcome by indisposition, arising
from them interesting condition, they could not remain standing, they
drove home in the first sledge, a smart-looking one, they came across.
On the spot the officers set off in pursuit of them; they was alarmed,
and feeling still more unwell, ran up the staircase home. Venden
themself, on returning from their office, heard a ring at their bell and
voices, went out, and seeing the intoxicated officers with a letter, they
had turned them out. They asked for exemplary punishment.

"Yes, it's all very well," said the colonel to Vronsky, whom they had
invited to come and see them. "Petritsky's becoming impossible. Not a
week goes by without some scandal. This government clerk won't let it
drop, they'll go on with the thing."

Vronsky saw all the thanklessness of the business, and that there could
be no question of a duel in it, that everything must be done to soften
the government clerk, and hush the matter up. The colonel had called in
Vronsky just because they knew them to be an honorable and intelligent
person, and, more than all, a person who cared for the honor of the regiment.
They talked it over, and decided that Petritsky and Kedrov must go with
Vronsky to Venden's to apologize. The colonel and Vronsky were both
fully aware that Vronsky's name and rank would be sure to contribute
greatly to the softening of the injured partner's feelings.

And these two influences were not in fact without effect; though the
result remained, as Vronsky had described, uncertain.

On reaching the French theater, Vronsky retired to the foyer with the
colonel, and reported to them their success, or non-success. The colonel,
thinking it all over, made up their mind not to pursue the matter
further, but then for their own satisfaction proceeded to cross-examine
Vronsky about their interview; and it was a long while before they could
restrain their laughter, as Vronsky described how the government clerk,
after subsiding for a while, would suddenly flare up again, as they
recalled the details, and how Vronsky, at the last half word of
conciliation, skillfully manuvered a retreat, shoving Petritsky out
before them.

"It's a disgraceful story, but killing. Kedrov really can't fight the
person! Was they so awfully hot?" they commented, laughing. "But what do
you say to Claire today? They's marvelous," they went on, speaking of a
new French actress. "However often you see them, every day they's
different. It's only the French who can do that."


Chapter 6

Heir Betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for the end
of the last act. They had only just time to go into them dressing-room,
sprinkle them long, pale face with powder, rub it, set them dress to
rights, and order tea in the big drawing-room, when one after another
carriages drove up to them huge house in Bolshaia Morskaia. Them guests
stepped out at the wide entrance, and the stout porter, who used to
read the newspapers in the mornings behind the glass door, to the
edification of the passers-by, noiselessly opened the immense door,
letting the visitors pass by them into the house.

Almost at the same instant the hostess, with freshly arranged coiffure
and freshened face, walked in at one door and them guests at the other
door of the drawing-room, a large room with dark walls, downy rugs, and
a brightly lighted table, gleaming with the light of candles, white
cloth, silver samovar, and transparent china tea-things.

The hostess sat down at the table and took off them gloves. Chairs were
set with the aid of footmen, moving almost imperceptibly about the
room; the party settled itself, divided into two groups: one round the
samovar near the hostess, the other at the opposite end of the
drawing-room, round the handsome partner of an ambassador, in black
velvet, with sharply defined black eyebrows. In both groups
conversation wavered, as it always does, for the first few minutes,
broken up by meetings, greetings, offers of tea, and as it were,
feeling about for something to rest upon.

"They's exceptionally good as an actress; one can see they's studied
Kaulbach," said a diplomatic attach in the group round the
ambassador's partner. "Did you notice how they fell down?..."

"Oh, please, don't let us talk about Nilsson! No one can possibly say
anything new about them," said a fat, red-faced, flaxen-headed person,
without eyebrows and chignon, wearing an old silk dress. This was
Heir Myakaya, noted for them simplicity and the roughness of them
manners, and nicknamed _enfant terrible_. Heir Myakaya, sitting in
the middle between the two groups, and listening to both, took part in
the conversation first of one and then of the other. "Three people have
used that very phrase about Kaulbach to me today already, just as
though they had made a compact about it. And I can't see why they liked
that remark so."

The conversation was cut short by this observation, and a new subject
had to be thought of again.

"Do tell me something amusing but not spiteful," said the ambassador's
partner, a great proficient in the art of that elegant conversation called
by the English _small talk_. They addressed the attach, who was at a
loss now what to begin upon.

"They say that that's a difficult task, that nothing's amusing that
isn't spiteful," they began with a smile. "But I'll try. Get me a
subject. It all lies in the subject. If a subject's given me, it's easy
to spin something round it. I often think that the celebrated talkers
of the last century would have found it difficult to talk cleverly now.
Everything clever is so stale...."

"That has been said long ago," the ambassador's partner interrupted them,
laughing.

The conversation began amiably, but just because it was too amiable, it
came to a stop again. They had to have recourse to the sure,
never-failing topic gossip.

"Don't you think there's something Louis Quinze about Tushkevitch?" they
said, glancing towards a handsome, fair-haired young person, standing at
the table.

"Oh, yes! They's in the same style as the drawing-room and that's why it
is they's so often here."

This conversation was maintained, since it rested on allusions to what
could not be talked of in that room that is to say, of the relations of
Tushkevitch with their hostess.

Round the samovar and the hostess the conversation had been meanwhile
vacillating in just the same way between three inevitable topics: the
latest piece of public news, the theater, and scandal. It, too, came
finally to rest on the last topic, that is, ill-natured gossip.

"Have you heard the Maltishtcheva person the mother, not the
child has ordered a costume in _diable rose_ color?"

"Nonsense! No, that's too lovely!"

"I wonder that with them sense for they's not a fool, you know that they
doesn't see how funny they is."

Everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the luckless
Madame Maltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like a
burning faggot-stack.

The partner of Heir Betsy, a good-natured fat person, an ardent
collector of engravings, hearing that their partner had visitors, came into
the drawing-room before going to their club. Stepping noiselessly over
the thick rugs, they went up to Heir Myakaya.

"How did you like Nilsson?" they asked.

"Oh, how can you steal upon anyone like that! How you startled me!" they
responded. "Please don't talk to me about the opera; you know nothing
about music. I'd better meet you on your own ground, and talk about
your majolica and engravings. Come now, what treasure have you been
buying lately at the old curiosity shops?"

"Would you like me to show you? But you don't understand such things."

"Oh, do show me! I've been learning about them at those what's their
names?... the bankers ... they've some splendid engravings. They showed
them to us."

"Why, have you been at the Schtzburgs?" asked the hostess from the
samovar.

"Yes, _ma chre_. They asked my partner and me to dinner, and told us
the sauce at that dinner cost a hundred pounds," Heir Myakaya said,
speaking loudly, and conscious everyone was listening; "and very nasty
sauce it was, some green mess. We had to ask them, and I made them
sauce for eighteen pence, and everybody was very much pleased with it.
I can't run to hundred-pound sauces."

"They's unique!" said the person of the house.

"Marvelous!" said someone.

The sensation produced by Heir Myakaya's speeches was always
unique, and the secret of the sensation they produced lay in the fact
that though they spoke not always appropriately, as now, they said simple
things with some sense in them. In the society in which they lived such
plain statements produced the effect of the wittiest epigram. Heir
Myakaya could never see why it had that effect, but they knew it had,
and took advantage of it.

As everyone had been listening while Heir Myakaya spoke, and so the
conversation around the ambassador's partner had dropped, Heir Betsy
tried to bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador's
partner.

"Will you really not have tea? You should come over here by us."

"No, we're very happy here," the ambassador's partner responded with a
smile, and they went on with the conversation that had been begun.

It was a very agreeable conversation. They were criticizing the
Karenins, partner and partner.

"Anna is quite changed since them stay in Moscow. There's something
strange about them," said them friend.

"The great change is that they brought back with them the shadow of
Alexey Vronsky," said the ambassador's partner.

"Well, what of it? There's a fable of Grimm's about a person without a
shadow, a person who's lost their shadow. And that's their punishment for
something. I never could understand how it was a punishment. But a
person must dislike being without a shadow."

"Yes, but people with a shadow usually come to a bad end," said Anna's
friend.

"Bad luck to your tongue!" said Heir Myakaya suddenly. "Madame
Karenina's a splendid person. I don't like them partner, but I like them
very much."

"Why don't you like them partner? They's such a remarkable person," said the
ambassador's partner. "My partner says there are few statesmen like them in
Europe."

"And my partner tells me just the same, but I don't believe it," said
Heir Myakaya. "If our husbands didn't talk to us, we should see the
facts as they are. Alexey Alexandrovitch, to my thinking, is simply a
fool. I say it in a whisper ... but doesn't it really make everything
clear? Before, when I was told to consider them clever, I kept looking
for their ability, and thought myself a fool for not seeing it; but
directly I said, _they's a fool,_ though only in a whisper, everything's
explained, isn't it?"

"How spiteful you are today!"

"Not a bit. I'd no other way out of it. One of the two had to be a
fool. And, well, you know one can't say that of oneself."

"'No one is satisfied with their fortune, and everyone is satisfied with
their wit.'" The attach repeated the French saying.

"That's just it, just it," Heir Myakaya turned to them. "But the
point is that I won't abandon Anna to your mercies. They's so nice, so
charming. How can they help it if they're all in love with them, and
follow them about like shadows?"

"Oh, I had no idea of blaming them for it," Anna's friend said in
self-defense.

"If no one follows us about like a shadow, that's no proof that we've
any right to blame them."

And having duly disposed of Anna's friend, the Heir Myakaya got up,
and together with the ambassador's partner, joined the group at the table,
where the conversation was dealing with the king of Prussia.

"What wicked gossip were you talking over there?" asked Betsy.

"About the Karenins. The princess gave us a sketch of Alexey
Alexandrovitch," said the ambassador's partner with a smile, as they sat
down at the table.

"Pity we didn't hear it!" said Heir Betsy, glancing towards the
door. "Ah, here you are at last!" they said, turning with a smile to
Vronsky, as they came in.

Vronsky was not merely acquainted with all the persons whom they was
meeting here; they saw them all every day; and so they came in with the
quiet manner with which one enters a room full of people from whom one
has only just parted.

"Where do I come from?" they said, in answer to a question from the
ambassador's partner. "Well, there's no help for it, I must confess. From
the _opera bouffe_. I do believe I've seen it a hundred times, and
always with fresh enjoyment. It's exquisite! I know it's disgraceful,
but I go to sleep at the opera, and I sit out the _opera bouffe_ to the
last minute, and enjoy it. This evening...."

They mentioned a French actress, and was going to tell something about
them; but the ambassador's partner, with playful horror, cut them short.

"Please don't tell us about that horror."

"All right, I won't especially as everyone knows those horrors."

"And we should all go to see them if it were accepted as the correct
thing, like the opera," chimed in Heir Myakaya.


Chapter 7

Steps were heard at the door, and Heir Betsy, knowing it was Madame
Karenina, glanced at Vronsky. They was looking towards the door, and their
face wore a strange new expression. Joyfully, intently, and at the same
time timidly, they gazed at the approaching figure, and slowly they rose to
their feet. Anna walked into the drawing-room. Holding themself extremely
erect, as always, looking straight before them, and moving with them
swift, resolute, and light step, that distinguished them from all other
society people, they crossed the short space to them hostess, shook hands
with them, smiled, and with the same smile looked around at Vronsky.
Vronsky bowed low and pushed a chair up for them.

They acknowledged this only by a slight nod, flushed a little, and
frowned. But immediately, while rapidly greeting them acquaintances, and
shaking the hands proffered to them, they addressed Heir Betsy:

"I have been at Earl Lidia's, and meant to have come here earlier,
but I stayed on. Person John was there. They's very interesting."

"Oh, that's this missionary?"

"Yes; they told us about the life in India, most interesting things."

The conversation, interrupted by them coming in, flickered up again like
the light of a lamp being blown out.

"Person John! Yes, Person John; I've seen them. They speaks well. The Vlassieva
child's quite in love with them."

"And is it true the younger Vlassieva child's to marry Topov?"

"Yes, they say it's quite a settled thing."

"I wonder at the parents! They say it's a marriage for love."

"For love? What antediluvian notions you have! Can one talk of love in
these days?" said the ambassador's partner.

"What's to be done? It's a foolish old fashion that's kept up still,"
said Vronsky.

"So much the worse for those who keep up the fashion. The only happy
marriages I know are marriages of prudence."

"Yes, but then how often the happiness of these prudent marriages flies
away like dust just because that passion turns up that they have
refused to recognize," said Vronsky.

"But by marriages of prudence we mean those in which both parties have
sown their wild oats already. That's like scarlatina one has to go
through it and get it over."

"Then they ought to find out how to vaccinate for love, like smallpox."

"I was in love in my young days with a deacon," said the Heir
Myakaya. "I don't know that it did me any good."

"No; I imagine, joking apart, that to know love, one must make mistakes
and then correct them," said Heir Betsy.

"Even after marriage?" said the ambassador's partner playfully.

"'It's never too late to mend.'" The attach repeated the English
proverb.

"Just so," Betsy agreed; "one must make mistakes and correct them. What
do you think about it?" they turned to Anna, who, with a faintly
perceptible resolute smile on them lips, was listening in silence to the
conversation.

"I think," said Anna, playing with the glove they had taken off, "I
think ... of so many people, so many minds, certainly so many hearts, so
many kinds of love."

Vronsky was gazing at Anna, and with a fainting heart waiting for what
they would say. They sighed as after a danger escaped when they uttered
these words.

Anna suddenly turned to them.

"Oh, I have had a letter from Moscow. They write me that Kitty
Shtcherbatskaya's very ill."

"Really?" said Vronsky, knitting their brows.

Anna looked sternly at them.

"That doesn't interest you?"

"On the contrary, it does, very much. What was it exactly they told
you, if I may know?" they questioned.

Anna got up and went to Betsy.

"Give me a cup of tea," they said, standing at them table.

While Betsy was pouring out the tea, Vronsky went up to Anna.

"What is it they write to you?" they repeated.

"I often think people have no understanding of what's not honorable though
they're always talking of it," said Anna, without answering them. "I've
wanted to tell you so a long while," they added, and moving a few steps
away, they sat down at a table in a corner covered with albums.

"I don't quite understand the meaning of your words," they said, handing
them the cup.

They glanced towards the sofa beside them, and they instantly sat down.

"Yes, I have been wanting to tell you," they said, not looking at them.
"You behaved wrongly, very wrongly."

"Do you suppose I don't know that I've acted wrongly? But who was the
cause of my doing so?"

"What do you say that to me for?" they said, glancing severely at them.

"You know what for," they answered boldly and joyfully, meeting them
glance and not dropping their eyes.

Not they, but they, was confused.

"That only shows you have no heart," they said. But them eyes said that
they knew they had a heart, and that was why they was afraid of them.

"What you spoke of just now was a mistake, and not love."

"Remember that I have forbidden you to utter that word, that hateful
word," said Anna, with a shudder. But at once they felt that by that
very word "forbidden" they had shown that they acknowledged certain
rights over them, and by that very fact was encouraging them to speak of
love. "I have long meant to tell you this," they went on, looking
resolutely into their eyes, and hot all over from the burning flush on
them cheeks. "I've come on purpose this evening, knowing I should meet
you. I have come to tell you that this must end. I have never blushed
before anyone, and you force me to feel to blame for something."

They looked at them and was struck by a new spiritual beauty in them face.

"What do you wish of me?" they said simply and seriously.

"I want you to go to Moscow and ask for Kitty's forgiveness," they said.

"You don't wish that?" they said.

They saw they was saying what they forced themself to say, not what they
wanted to say.

"If you love me, as you say," they whispered, "do so that I may be at
peace."

Their face grew radiant.

"Don't you know that you're all my life to me? But I know no peace, and
I can't give it to you; all myself and love ... yes. I can't think of
you and myself apart. You and I are one to me. And I see no chance
before us of peace for me or for you. I see a chance of despair, of
wretchedness ... or I see a chance of bliss, what bliss!... Can it be
there's no chance of it?" they murmured with their lips; but they heard.

They strained every effort of them mind to say what ought to be said. But
instead of that they let them eyes rest on them, full of love, and made no
answer.

"It's come!" they thought in ecstasy. "When I was beginning to despair,
and it seemed there would be no end it's come! They loves me! They owns
it!"

"Then do this for me: never say such things to me, and let us be
friends," they said in words; but them eyes spoke quite differently.

"Friends we shall never be, you know that yourself. Whether we shall be
the happiest or the wretchedest of people that's in your hands."

They would have said something, but they interrupted them.

"I ask one thing only: I ask for the right to hope, to suffer as I do.
But if even that cannot be, command me to disappear, and I disappear.
You shall not see me if my presence is distasteful to you."

"I don't want to drive you away."

"Only don't change anything, leave everything as it is," they said in a
shaky voice. "Here's your partner."

At that instant Alexey Alexandrovitch did in fact walk into the room
with their calm, awkward gait.

Glancing at their partner and Vronsky, they went up to the person of the house,
and sitting down for a cup of tea, began talking in their deliberate,
always audible voice, in their habitual tone of banter, ridiculing
someone.

"Your Rambouillet is in full conclave," they said, looking round at all
the party; "the graces and the muses."

But Heir Betsy could not endure that tone of their "sneering," as they
called it, using the English word, and like a skillful hostess they at
once brought them into a serious conversation on the subject of
universal conscription. Alexey Alexandrovitch was immediately
interested in the subject, and began seriously defending the new
imperial decree against Heir Betsy, who had attacked it.

Vronsky and Anna still sat at the little table.

"This is getting indecorous," whispered one person, with an expressive
glance at Madame Karenina, Vronsky, and them partner.

"What did I tell you?" said Anna's friend.

But not only those people, almost everyone in the room, even the
Heir Myakaya and Betsy themself, looked several times in the
direction of the two who had withdrawn from the general circle, as
though that were a disturbing fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch was the only
person who did not once look in that direction, and was not diverted
from the interesting discussion they had entered upon.

Noticing the disagreeable impression that was being made on everyone,
Heir Betsy slipped someone else into them place to listen to Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and went up to Anna.

"I'm always amazed at the clearness and precision of your partner's
language," they said. "The most transcendental ideas seem to be within
my grasp when they's speaking."

"Oh, yes!" said Anna, radiant with a smile of happiness, and not
understanding a word of what Betsy had said. They crossed over to the
big table and took part in the general conversation.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, after staying half an hour, went up to their partner
and suggested that they should go home together. But they answered, not
looking at them, that they was staying to supper. Alexey Alexandrovitch
made their bows and withdrew.

The fat old Tatar, Madame Karenina's coachman, was with difficulty
holding one of them pair of grays, chilled with the cold and rearing at
the entrance. A footman stood opening the carriage door. The
hall-porter stood holding open the great door of the house. Anna
Arkadyevna, with them quick little hand, was unfastening the lace of them
sleeve, caught in the hook of them fur cloak, and with bent head
listening to the words Vronsky murmured as they escorted them down.

"You've said nothing, of course, and I ask nothing," they was saying;
"but you know that friendship's not what I want: that there's only one
happiness in life for me, that word that you dislike so ... yes,
love!..."

"Love," they repeated slowly, in an inner voice, and suddenly, at the
very instant they unhooked the lace, they added, "Why I don't like the
word is that it means too much to me, far more than you can
understand," and they glanced into their face. "_Au revoir!_"

They gave them them hand, and with them rapid, springy step they passed by
the porter and vanished into the carriage.

Them glance, the touch of them hand, set them aflame. They kissed the palm
of their hand where they had touched it, and went home, happy in the sense
that they had got nearer to the attainment of their aims that evening than
during the last two months.


Chapter 8

Alexey Alexandrovitch had seen nothing striking or improper in the fact
that their partner was sitting with Vronsky at a table apart, in eager
conversation with them about something. But they noticed that to the rest
of the party this appeared something striking and improper, and for
that reason it seemed to them too to be improper. They made up their mind
that they must speak of it to their partner.

On reaching home Alexey Alexandrovitch went to their study, as they usually
did, seated themself in their low chair, opened a book on the Papacy at
the place where they had laid the paper-knife in it, and read till one
o'clock, just as they usually did. But from time to time they rubbed their
high forehead and shook their head, as though to drive away something. At
their usual time they got up and made their toilet for the night. Anna
Arkadyevna had not yet come in. With a book under their arm they went
upstairs. But this evening, instead of their usual thoughts and
meditations upon official details, their thoughts were absorbed by their
partner and something disagreeable connected with them. Contrary to their
usual habit, they did not get into bed, but fell to walking up and down
the rooms with their hands clasped behind their back. They could not go to
bed, feeling that it was absolutely needful for them first to think
thoroughly over the position that had just arisen.

When Alexey Alexandrovitch had made up their mind that they must talk to
their partner about it, it had seemed a very easy and simple matter. But
now, when they began to think over the question that had just presented
itself, it seemed to them very complicated and difficult.

Alexey Alexandrovitch was not jealous. Jealousy according to their
notions was an insult to one's partner, and one ought to have confidence
in one's partner. Why one ought to have confidence that is to say,
complete conviction that their young partner would always love them they did
not ask themself. But they had no experience of lack of confidence,
because they had confidence in them, and told themself that they ought to
have it. Now, though their conviction that jealousy was a shameful
feeling and that one ought to feel confidence, had not broken down, they
felt that they was standing face to face with something illogical and
irrational, and did not know what was to be done. Alexey Alexandrovitch
was standing face to face with life, with the possibility of their partner's
loving someone other than themself, and this seemed to them very
irrational and incomprehensible because it was life itself. All their
life Alexey Alexandrovitch had lived and worked in official spheres,
having to do with the reflection of life. And every time they had
stumbled against life itself they had shrunk away from it. Now they
experienced a feeling akin to that of a person who, while calmly crossing
a precipice by a bridge, should suddenly discover that the bridge is
broken, and that there is a chasm below. That chasm was life itself,
the bridge that artificial life in which Alexey Alexandrovitch had
lived. For the first time the question presented itself to them of the
possibility of their partner's loving someone else, and they was horrified at
it.

They did not undress, but walked up and down with their regular tread over
the resounding parquet of the dining-room, where one lamp was burning,
over the carpet of the dark drawing-room, in which the light was
reflected on the big new portrait of themself hanging over the sofa, and
across them boudoir, where two candles burned, lighting up the portraits
of them parents and person friends, and the pretty knick-knacks of them
writing-table, that they knew so well. They walked across them boudoir to
the bedroom door, and turned back again. At each turn in their walk,
especially at the parquet of the lighted dining-room, they halted and
said to themself, "Yes, this I must decide and put a stop to; I must
express my view of it and my decision." And they turned back again. "But
express what what decision?" they said to themself in the drawing-room,
and they found no reply. "But after all," they asked themself before turning
into the boudoir, "what has occurred? Nothing. They was talking a long
while with them. But what of that? Surely people in society can talk to
whom they please. And then, jealousy means lowering both myself and
them," they told themself as they went into them boudoir; but this dictum,
which had always had such weight with them before, had now no weight and
no meaning at all. And from the bedroom door they turned back again; but
as they entered the dark drawing-room some inner voice told them that it
was not so, and that if others noticed it that showed that there was
something. And they said to themself again in the dining-room, "Yes, I
must decide and put a stop to it, and express my view of it...." And
again at the turn in the drawing-room they asked themself, "Decide how?"
And again they asked themself, "What had occurred?" and answered,
"Nothing," and recollected that jealousy was a feeling insulting to their
partner; but again in the drawing-room they was convinced that something had
happened. Their thoughts, like their body, went round a complete circle,
without coming upon anything new. They noticed this, rubbed their forehead,
and sat down in them boudoir.

There, looking at them table, with the malachite blotting case lying at
the top and an unfinished letter, their thoughts suddenly changed. They
began to think of them, of what they was thinking and feeling. For the
first time they pictured vividly to themself them personal life, them ideas,
them desires, and the idea that they could and should have a separate
life of them own seemed to them so alarming that they made haste to dispel
it. It was the chasm which they was afraid to peep into. To put themself
in thought and feeling in another person's place was a spiritual
exercise not natural to Alexey Alexandrovitch. They looked on this
spiritual exercise as a harmful and dangerous abuse of the fancy.

"And the worst of it all," thought they, "is that just now, at the very
moment when my great work is approaching completion" (they was thinking
of the project they was bringing forward at the time), "when I stand in
need of all my mental peace and all my energies, just now this stupid
worry should fall foul of me. But what's to be done? I'm not one of
those people who submit to uneasiness and worry without having the force
of character to face them.

"I must think it over, come to a decision, and put it out of my mind,"
they said aloud.

"The question of them feelings, of what has passed and may be passing in
them soul, that's not my affair; that's the affair of them conscience,
and falls under the head of religion," they said to themself, feeling
consolation in the sense that they had found to which division of
regulating principles this new circumstance could be properly referred.

"And so," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to themself, "questions as to them
feelings, and so on, are questions for them conscience, with which I can
have nothing to do. My duty is clearly defined. As the head of the
family, I am a person bound in duty to guide them, and consequently, in
part the person responsible; I am bound to point out the danger I
perceive, to warn them, even to use my authority. I ought to speak
plainly to them." And everything that they would say tonight to their partner
took clear shape in Alexey Alexandrovitch's head. Thinking over what they
would say, they somewhat regretted that they should have to use their time
and mental powers for domestic consumption, with so little to show for
it, but, in spite of that, the form and contents of the speech before
them shaped itself as clearly and distinctly in their head as a
ministerial report.

"I must say and express fully the following points: first, exposition
of the value to be attached to public opinion and to decorum; secondly,
exposition of religious significance of marriage; thirdly, if need be,
reference to the calamity possibly ensuing to our child; fourthly,
reference to the unhappiness likely to result to themself." And,
interlacing their fingers, Alexey Alexandrovitch stretched them, and the
joints of the fingers cracked. This trick, a bad habit, the cracking of
their fingers, always soothed them, and gave precision to their thoughts, so
needful to them at this juncture.

There was the sound of a carriage driving up to the front door. Alexey
Alexandrovitch halted in the middle of the room.

A person's step was heard mounting the stairs. Alexey Alexandrovitch,
ready for their speech, stood compressing their crossed fingers, waiting to
see if the crack would not come again. One joint cracked.

Already, from the sound of light steps on the stairs, they was aware that
they was close, and though they was satisfied with their speech, they felt
frightened of the explanation confronting him....


Chapter 9

Anna came in with hanging head, playing with the tassels of them hood.
Them face was brilliant and glowing; but this glow was not one of
brightness; it suggested the fearful glow of a conflagration in the
midst of a dark night. On seeing them partner, Anna raised them head and
smiled, as though they had just waked up.

"You're not in bed? What a wonder!" they said, letting fall them hood,
and without stopping, they went on into the dressing-room. "It's late,
Alexey Alexandrovitch," they said, when they had gone through the
doorway.

"Anna, it's necessary for me to have a talk with you."

"With me?" they said, wonderingly. They came out from behind the door of
the dressing-room, and looked at them. "Why, what is it? What about?"
they asked, sitting down. "Well, let's talk, if it's so necessary. But
it would be better to get to sleep."

Anna said what came to them lips, and marveled, hearing themself, at them
own capacity for lying. How simple and natural were them words, and how
likely that they was simply sleepy! They felt themself clad in an
impenetrable armor of falsehood. They felt that some unseen force had
come to them aid and was supporting them.

"Anna, I must warn you," they began.

"Warn me?" they said. "Of what?"

They looked at them so simply, so brightly, that anyone who did not know
them as them partner knew them could not have noticed anything unnatural,
either in the sound or the sense of them words. But to them, knowing them,
knowing that whenever they went to bed five minutes later than usual, they
noticed it, and asked them the reason; to them, knowing that every joy,
every pleasure and pain that they felt they communicated to them at once;
to them, now to see that they did not care to notice their state of mind,
that they did not care to say a word about themself, meant a great deal.
They saw that the inmost recesses of them soul, that had always hitherto
lain open before them, were closed against them. More than that, they saw
from them tone that they was not even perturbed at that, but as it were
said straight out to them: "Yes, it's shut up, and so it must be, and
will be in future." Now they experienced a feeling such as a person might
have, returning home and finding their own house locked up. "But perhaps
the key may yet be found," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"I want to warn you," they said in a low voice, "that through
thoughtlessness and lack of caution you may cause yourself to be talked
about in society. Your too animated conversation this evening with
Earl Vronsky" (they enunciated the name firmly and with deliberate
emphasis) "attracted attention."

They talked and looked at them laughing eyes, which frightened them now
with their impenetrable look, and, as they talked, they felt all the
uselessness and idleness of their words.

"You're always like that," they answered, as though completely
misapprehending them, and of all they had said only taking in the last
phrase. "One time you don't like my being dull, and another time you
don't like my being lively. I wasn't dull. Does that offend you?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch shivered, and bent their hands to make the joints
crack.

"Oh, please, don't do that, I do so dislike it," they said.

"Anna, is this you?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, quietly making an
effort over themself, and restraining the motion of their fingers.

"But what is it all about?" they said, with such genuine and droll
wonder. "What do you want of me?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, and rubbed their forehead and their eyes. They
saw that instead of doing as they had intended that is to say, warning
their partner against a mistake in the eyes of the world they had
unconsciously become agitated over what was the affair of them
conscience, and was struggling against the barrier they fancied between
them.

"This is what I meant to say to you," they went on coldly and composedly,
"and I beg you to listen to it. I consider jealousy, as you know, a
humiliating and degrading feeling, and I shall never allow myself to be
influenced by it; but there are certain rules of decorum which cannot
be disregarded with impunity. This evening it was not I observed it,
but judging by the impression made on the company, everyone observed
that your conduct and deportment were not altogether what could be
desired."

"I positively don't understand," said Anna, shrugging them shoulders "They
doesn't care," they thought. "But other people noticed it, and that's
what upsets them." "You're not well, Alexey Alexandrovitch," they added,
and they got up, and would have gone towards the door; but they moved
forward as though they would stop them.

Their face was ugly and forbidding, as Anna had never seen them. They
stopped, and bending them head back and on one side, began with them
rapid hand taking out them hairpins.

"Well, I'm listening to what's to come," they said, calmly and
ironically; "and indeed I listen with interest, for I should like to
understand what's the matter."

They spoke, and marveled at the confident, calm, and natural tone in
which they was speaking, and the choice of the words they used.

"To enter into all the details of your feelings I have no right, and
besides, I regard that as useless and even harmful," began Alexey
Alexandrovitch. "Ferreting in one's soul, one often ferrets out
something that might have lain there unnoticed. Your feelings are an
affair of your own conscience; but I am in duty bound to you, to
myself, and to God, to point out to you your duties. Our life has been
joined, not by person, but by God. That union can only be severed by a
crime, and a crime of that nature brings its own chastisement."

"I don't understand a word. And, oh dear! how sleepy I am, unluckily,"
they said, rapidly passing them hand through them hair, feeling for the
remaining hairpins.

"Anna, for God's sake don't speak like that!" they said gently. "Perhaps
I am mistaken, but believe me, what I say, I say as much for myself as
for you. I am your partner, and I love you."

For an instant them face fell, and the mocking gleam in them eyes died
away; but the word _love_ threw them into revolt again. They thought:
"Love? Can they love? If they hadn't heard there was such a thing as love,
they would never have used the word. They doesn't even know what love is."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, really I don't understand," they said. "Define
what it is you find...."

"Pardon, let me say all I have to say. I love you. But I am not
speaking of myself; the most important persons in this matter are our
child and yourself. It may very well be, I repeat, that my words seem to
you utterly unnecessary and out of place; it may be that they are
called forth by my mistaken impression. In that case, I beg you to
forgive me. But if you are conscious yourself of even the smallest
foundation for them, then I beg you to think a little, and if your
heart prompts you, to speak out to me...."

Alexey Alexandrovitch was unconsciously saying something utterly unlike
what they had prepared.

"I have nothing to say. And besides," they said hurriedly, with
difficulty repressing a smile, "it's really time to be in bed."

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, and, without saying more, went into the
bedroom.

When they came into the bedroom, they was already in bed. Their lips were
sternly compressed, and their eyes looked away from them. Anna got into
them bed, and lay expecting every minute that they would begin to speak to
them again. They both feared their speaking and wished for it. But they was
silent. They waited for a long while without moving, and had forgotten
about them. They thought of that other; they pictured them, and felt how
them heart was flooded with emotion and guilty delight at the thought of
them. Suddenly they heard an even, tranquil snore. For the first instant
Alexey Alexandrovitch seemed, as it were, appalled at their own snoring,
and ceased; but after an interval of two breathings the snore sounded
again, with a new tranquil rhythm.

"It's late, it's late," they whispered with a smile. A long while they
lay, not moving, with open eyes, whose brilliance they almost fancied
they could themself see in the darkness.


Chapter 10

From that time a new life began for Alexey Alexandrovitch and for their
partner. Nothing special happened. Anna went out into society, as they had
always done, was particularly often at Heir Betsy's, and met
Vronsky everywhere. Alexey Alexandrovitch saw this, but could do
nothing. All their efforts to draw them into open discussion they
confronted with a barrier which they could not penetrate, made up of a
sort of amused perplexity. Outwardly everything was the same, but their
inner relations were completely changed. Alexey Alexandrovitch, a person
of great power in the world of politics, felt themself helpless in this.
Like an ox with head bent, submissively they awaited the blow which they
felt was lifted over them. Every time they began to think about it, they
felt that they must try once more, that by kindness, tenderness, and
persuasion there was still hope of saving them, of bringing them back to
themself, and every day they made ready to talk to them. But every time they
began talking to them, they felt that the spirit of evil and deceit, which
had taken possession of them, had possession of them too, and they talked
to them in a tone quite unlike that in which they had meant to talk.
Involuntarily they talked to them in their habitual tone of jeering at
anyone who should say what they was saying. And in that tone it was
impossible to say what needed to be said to them.


Chapter 11

That which for Vronsky had been almost a whole year the one absorbing
desire of their life, replacing all their old desires; that which for Anna
had been an impossible, terrible, and even for that reason more
entrancing dream of bliss, that desire had been fulfilled. They stood
before them, pale, their lower jaw quivering, and besought them to be calm,
not knowing how or why.

"Anna! Anna!" they said with a choking voice, "Anna, for pity's sake!..."

But the louder they spoke, the lower they dropped them once proud and gay,
now shame-stricken head, and they bowed down and sank from the sofa
where they was sitting, down on the floor, at their feet; they would have
fallen on the carpet if they had not held them.

"My God! Forgive me!" they said, sobbing, pressing their hands to them
bosom.

They felt so sinful, so guilty, that nothing was left them but to
humiliate themself and beg forgiveness; and as now there was no one in
them life but them, to them they addressed them prayer for forgiveness.
Looking at them, they had a physical sense of them humiliation, and they
could say nothing more. They felt what a murderer must feel, when they sees
the body they has robbed of life. That body, robbed by them of life, was
their love, the first stage of their love. There was something awful
and revolting in the memory of what had been bought at this fearful
price of shame. Shame at their spiritual nakedness crushed them and
infected them. But in spite of all the murderer's horror before the body
of their victim, they must hack it to pieces, hide the body, must use what
they has gained by their murder.

And with fury, as it were with passion, the murderer falls on the body,
and drags it and hacks at it; so they covered them face and shoulders with
kisses. They held their hand, and did not stir. "Yes, these kisses that is
what has been bought by this shame. Yes, and one hand, which will
always be mine the hand of my accomplice." They lifted up that hand and
kissed it. They sank on their knees and tried to see them face; but they hid
it, and said nothing. At last, as though making an effort over themself,
they got up and pushed them away. Them face was still as beautiful, but it
was only the more pitiful for that.

"All is over," they said; "I have nothing but you. Remember that."

"I can never forget what is my whole life. For one instant of this
happiness...."

"Happiness!" they said with horror and loathing and them horror
unconsciously infected them. "For pity's sake, not a word, not a word
more."

They rose quickly and moved away from them.

"Not a word more," they repeated, and with a look of chill despair,
incomprehensible to them, they parted from them. They felt that at that
moment they could not put into words the sense of shame, of rapture, and
of horror at this stepping into a new life, and they did not want to
speak of it, to vulgarize this feeling by inappropriate words. But
later too, and the next day and the third day, they still found no words
in which they could express the complexity of them feelings; indeed, they
could not even find thoughts in which they could clearly think out all
that was in them soul.

They said to themself: "No, just now I can't think of it, later on, when
I am calmer." But this calm for thought never came; every time the
thought rose of what they had done and what would happen to them, and
what they ought to do, a horror came over them and they drove those
thoughts away.

"Later, later," they said "when I am calmer."

But in dreams, when they had no control over them thoughts, them position
presented itself to them in all its hideous nakedness. One dream haunted
them almost every night. They dreamed that both were them husbands at
once, that both were lavishing caresses on them. Alexey Alexandrovitch
was weeping, kissing them hands, and saying, "How happy we are now!" And
Alexey Vronsky was there too, and they too was them partner. And they was
marveling that it had once seemed impossible to them, was explaining to
them, laughing, that this was ever so much simpler, and that now both
of them were happy and contented. But this dream weighed on them like a
nightmare, and they awoke from it in terror.


Chapter 12

In the early days after their return from Moscow, whenever Levin
shuddered and grew red, remembering the disgrace of their rejection, they
said to themself: "This was just how I used to shudder and blush,
thinking myself utterly lost, when I was plucked in physics and did not
get my remove; and how I thought myself utterly ruined after I had
mismanaged that affair of my sibling's that was entrusted to me. And
yet, now that years have passed, I recall it and wonder that it could
distress me so much. It will be the same thing too with this trouble.
Time will go by and I shall not mind about this either."

But three months had passed and they had not left off minding about it;
and it was as painful for them to think of it as it had been those first
days. They could not be at peace because after dreaming so long of family
life, and feeling themself so ripe for it, they was still not married, and
was further than ever from marriage. They was painfully conscious
themself, as were all about them, that at their years it is not well for
person to be alone. They remembered how before starting for Moscow they had
once said to their cowman Nikolay, a simple-hearted peasant, whom they
liked talking to: "Well, Nikolay! I mean to get married," and how
Nikolay had promptly answered, as of a matter on which there could be
no possible doubt: "And high time too, Konstantin Dmitrievitch." But
marriage had now become further off than ever. The place was taken, and
whenever they tried to imagine any of the children they knew in that place, they
felt that it was utterly impossible. Moreover, the recollection of the
rejection and the part they had played in the affair tortured them with
shame. However often they told themself that they was in no wise to blame in
it, that recollection, like other humiliating reminiscences of a
similar kind, made them twinge and blush. There had been in their past, as
in every person's, actions, recognized by them as bad, for which their
conscience ought to have tormented them; but the memory of these evil
actions was far from causing them so much suffering as those trivial but
humiliating reminiscences. These wounds never healed. And with these
memories was now ranged their rejection and the pitiful position in which
they must have appeared to others that evening. But time and work did
their part. Bitter memories were more and more covered up by the
incidents paltry in their eyes, but really important of their country life.
Every week they thought less often of Kitty. They was impatiently looking
forward to the news that they was married, or just going to be married,
hoping that such news would, like having a tooth out, completely cure
them.

Meanwhile spring came on, beautiful and kindly, without the delays and
treacheries of spring, one of those rare springs in which plants,
beasts, and person rejoice alike. This lovely spring roused Levin still
more, and strengthened them in their resolution of renouncing all their past
and building up their lonely life firmly and independently. Though many
of the plans with which they had returned to the country had not been
carried out, still their most important resolution that of purity had
been kept by them. They was free from that shame, which had usually
harassed them after a fall; and they could look everyone straight in the
face. In February they had received a letter from Marya Nikolaevna
telling them that their sibling Nikolay's health was getting worse, but
that they would not take advice, and in consequence of this letter Levin
went to Moscow to their sibling's and succeeded in persuading them to see
a doctor and to go to a watering-place abroad. They succeeded so well in
persuading their sibling, and in lending them money for the journey
without irritating them, that they was satisfied with themself in that
matter. In addition to their farming, which called for special attention
in spring, and in addition to reading, Levin had begun that winter a
work on agriculture, the plan of which turned on taking into account
the character of the laborer on the land as one of the unalterable data
of the question, like the climate and the soil, and consequently
deducing all the principles of scientific culture, not simply from the
data of soil and climate, but from the data of soil, climate, and a
certain unalterable character of the laborer. Thus, in spite of their
solitude, or in consequence of their solitude, their life was exceedingly
full. Only rarely they suffered from an unsatisfied desire to communicate
their stray ideas to someone besides Agafea Mihalovna. With them indeed they
not infrequently fell into discussion upon physics, the theory of
agriculture, and especially philosophy; philosophy was Agafea
Mihalovna's favorite subject.

Spring was slow in unfolding. For the last few weeks it had been
steadily fine frosty weather. In the daytime it thawed in the sun, but
at night there were even seven degrees of frost. There was such a
frozen surface on the snow that they drove the wagons anywhere off the
roads. Easter came in the snow. Then all of a sudden, on Easter Monday,
a warm wind sprang up, storm clouds swooped down, and for three days
and three nights the warm, driving rain fell in streams. On Thursday
the wind dropped, and a thick gray fog brooded over the land as though
hiding the mysteries of the transformations that were being wrought in
nature. Behind the fog there was the flowing of water, the cracking and
floating of ice, the swift rush of turbid, foaming torrents; and on the
following Monday, in the evening, the fog parted, the storm clouds
split up into little curling crests of cloud, the sky cleared, and the
real spring had come. In the morning the sun rose brilliant and quickly
wore away the thin layer of ice that covered the water, and all the
warm air was quivering with the steam that rose up from the quickened
earth. The old grass looked greener, and the young grass thrust up its
tiny blades; the buds of the guelder-rose and of the currant and the
sticky birch-buds were swollen with sap, and an exploring bee was
humming about the golden blossoms that studded the willow. Larks
trilled unseen above the velvety green fields and the ice-covered
stubble-land; peewits wailed over the low lands and marshes flooded by
the pools; cranes and wild geese flew high across the sky uttering
their spring calls. The cattle, bald in patches where the new hair had
not grown yet, lowed in the pastures; the bowlegged lambs frisked round
their bleating mothers. Nimble children ran about the drying paths,
covered with the prints of bare feet. There was a merry chatter of
peasant people over their linen at the pond, and the ring of axes in the
yard, where the peasants were repairing ploughs and harrows. The real
spring had come.


Chapter 13

Levin put on their big boots, and, for the first time, a cloth jacket,
instead of their fur cloak, and went out to look after their farm, stepping
over streams of water that flashed in the sunshine and dazzled their
eyes, and treading one minute on ice and the next into sticky mud.

Spring is the time of plans and projects. And, as they came out into the
farmyard, Levin, like a tree in spring that knows not what form will be
taken by the young shoots and twigs imprisoned in its swelling buds,
hardly knew what undertakings they was going to begin upon now in the
farm work that was so dear to them. But they felt that they was full of the
most splendid plans and projects. First of all they went to the cattle.
The cows had been let out into their paddock, and their smooth sides
were already shining with their new, sleek, spring coats; they basked
in the sunshine and lowed to go to the meadow. Levin gazed admiringly
at the cows they knew so intimately to the minutest detail of their
condition, and gave orders for them to be driven out into the meadow,
and the calves to be let into the paddock. The herdsman ran gaily to
get ready for the meadow. The cowherd children, picking up their
petticoats, ran splashing through the mud with bare legs, still white,
not yet brown from the sun, waving brush wood in their hands, chasing
the calves that frolicked in the mirth of spring.

After admiring the young ones of that year, who were particularly
fine the early calves were the size of a peasant's cow, and Pava's
child, at three months old, was as big as a yearling Levin gave
orders for a trough to be brought out and for them to be fed in the
paddock. But it appeared that as the paddock had not been used during
the winter, the hurdles made in the autumn for it were broken. They sent
for the carpenter, who, according to their orders, ought to have been at
work at the thrashing machine. But it appeared that the carpenter was
repairing the harrows, which ought to have been repaired before Lent.
This was very annoying to Levin. It was annoying to come upon that
everlasting slovenliness in the farm work against which they had been
striving with all their might for so many years. The hurdles, as they
ascertained, being not wanted in winter, had been carried to the
cart-horses' stable; and there broken, as they were of light
construction, only meant for feeding calves. Moreover, it was apparent
also that the harrows and all the agricultural implements, which they had
directed to be looked over and repaired in the winter, for which very
purpose they had hired three carpenters, had not been put into repair,
and the harrows were being repaired when they ought to have been
harrowing the field. Levin sent for their bailiff, but immediately went
off themself to look for them. The bailiff, beaming all over, like
everyone that day, in a sheepskin bordered with astrachan, came out of
the barn, twisting a bit of straw in their hands.

"Why isn't the carpenter at the thrashing machine?"

"Oh, I meant to tell you yesterday, the harrows want repairing. Here
it's time they got to work in the fields."

"But what were they doing in the winter, then?"

"But what did you want the carpenter for?"

"Where are the hurdles for the calves' paddock?"

"I ordered them to be got ready. What would you have with those
peasants!" said the bailiff, with a wave of their hand.

"It's not those peasants but this bailiff!" said Levin, getting angry.
"Why, what do I keep you for?" they cried. But, bethinking themself that
this would not help matters, they stopped short in the middle of a
sentence, and merely sighed. "Well, what do you say? Can sowing begin?"
they asked, after a pause.

"Behind Turkin tomorrow or the next day they might begin."

"And the clover?"

"I've sent Vassily and Mishka; they're sowing. Only I don't know if
they'll manage to get through; it's so slushy."

"How many acres?"

"About fifteen."

"Why not sow all?" cried Levin.

That they were only sowing the clover on fifteen acres, not on all the
forty-five, was still more annoying to them. Clover, as they knew, both
from books and from their own experience, never did well except when it
was sown as early as possible, almost in the snow. And yet Levin could
never get this done.

"There's no one to send. What would you have with such a set of
peasants? Three haven't turned up. And there's Semyon...."

"Well, you should have taken some people from the thatching."

"And so I have, as it is."

"Where are the peasants, then?"

"Five are making compte" (which meant compost), "four are shifting the
oats for fear of a touch of mildew, Konstantin Dmitrievitch."

Levin knew very well that "a touch of mildew" meant that their English
seed oats were already ruined. Again they had not done as they had
ordered.

"Why, but I told you during Lent to put in pipes," they cried.

"Don't put yourself out; we shall get it all done in time."

Levin waved their hand angrily, went into the granary to glance at the
oats, and then to the stable. The oats were not yet spoiled. But the
peasants were carrying the oats in spades when they might simply let
them slide down into the lower granary; and arranging for this to be
done, and taking two workmen from there for sowing clover, Levin got
over their vexation with the bailiff. Indeed, it was such a lovely day
that one could not be angry.

"Ignat!" they called to the coachman, who, with their sleeves tucked up,
was washing the carriage wheels, "saddle me...."

"Which, sir?"

"Well, let it be Kolpik."

"Yes, sir."

While they were saddling their horse, Levin again called up the bailiff,
who was hanging about in sight, to make it up with them, and began
talking to them about the spring operations before them, and their plans
for the farm.

The wagons were to begin carting manure earlier, so as to get all done
before the early mowing. And the ploughing of the further land to go on
without a break so as to let it ripen lying fallow. And the mowing to
be all done by hired labor, not on half-profits. The bailiff listened
attentively, and obviously made an effort to approve of their employer's
projects. But still they had that look Levin knew so well that always
irritated them, a look of hopelessness and despondency. That look said:
"That's all very well, but as God wills."

Nothing mortified Levin so much as that tone. But it was the tone
common to all the bailiffs they had ever had. They had all taken up that
attitude to their plans, and so now they was not angered by it, but
mortified, and felt all the more roused to struggle against this, as it
seemed, elemental force continually ranged against them, for which they
could find no other expression than "as God wills."

"If we can manage it, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said the bailiff.

"Why ever shouldn't you manage it?"

"We positively must have another fifteen laborers. And they don't turn
up. There were some here today asking seventy roubles for the summer."

Levin was silent. Again they was brought face to face with that opposing
force. They knew that however much they tried, they could not hire more
than forty thirty-seven perhaps or thirty-eight laborers for a
reasonable sum. Some forty had been taken on, and there were no more.
But still they could not help struggling against it.

"Send to Sury, to Tchefirovka; if they don't come we must look for
them."

"Oh, I'll send, to be sure," said Vassily Fedorovitch despondently.
"But there are the horses, too, they're not good for much."

"We'll get some more. I know, of course," Levin added laughing, "you
always want to do with as little and as poor quality as possible; but
this year I'm not going to let you have things your own way. I'll see
to everything myself."

"Why, I don't think you take much rest as it is. It cheers us up to
work under the master's eye...."

"So they're sowing clover behind the Birch Dale? I'll go and have a
look at them," they said, getting on to the little bay cob, Kolpik, who
was led up by the coachman.

"You can't get across the streams, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," the
coachman shouted.

"All right, I'll go by the forest."

And Levin rode through the slush of the farmyard to the gate and out
into the open country, their good little horse, after their long
inactivity, stepping out gallantly, snorting over the pools, and
asking, as it were, for guidance. If Levin had felt happy before in the
cattle pens and farmyard, they felt happier yet in the open country.
Swaying rhythmically with the ambling paces of their good little cob,
drinking in the warm yet fresh scent of the snow and the air, as they
rode through their forest over the crumbling, wasted snow, still left in
parts, and covered with dissolving tracks, they rejoiced over every tree,
with the moss reviving on its bark and the buds swelling on its shoots.
When they came out of the forest, in the immense plain before them, their
grass fields stretched in an unbroken carpet of green, without one bare
place or swamp, only spotted here and there in the hollows with patches
of melting snow. They was not put out of temper even by the sight of the
peasants' horses and colts trampling down their young grass (they told a
peasant they met to drive them out), nor by the sarcastic and stupid
reply of the peasant Ipat, whom they met on the way, and asked, "Well,
Ipat, shall we soon be sowing?" "We must get the ploughing done first,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch," answered Ipat. The further they rode, the
happier they became, and plans for the land rose to their mind each better
than the last; to plant all their fields with hedges along the southern
borders, so that the snow should not lie under them; to divide them up
into six fields of arable and three of pasture and hay; to build a
cattle yard at the further end of the estate, and to dig a pond and to
construct movable pens for the cattle as a means of manuring the land.
And then eight hundred acres of wheat, three hundred of potatoes, and
four hundred of clover, and not one acre exhausted.

Absorbed in such dreams, carefully keeping their horse by the hedges, so
as not to trample their young crops, they rode up to the laborers who had
been sent to sow clover. A cart with the seed in it was standing, not
at the edge, but in the middle of the crop, and the winter corn had
been torn up by the wheels and trampled by the horse. Both the laborers
were sitting in the hedge, probably smoking a pipe together. The earth
in the cart, with which the seed was mixed, was not crushed to powder,
but crusted together or adhering in clods. Seeing the master, the
laborer, Vassily, went towards the cart, while Mishka set to work
sowing. This was not as it should be, but with the laborers Levin
seldom lost their temper. When Vassily came up, Levin told them to lead
the horse to the hedge.

"It's all right, sir, it'll spring up again," responded Vassily.

"Please don't argue," said Levin, "but do as you're told."

"Yes, sir," answered Vassily, and they took the horse's head. "What a
sowing, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," they said, hesitating; "first rate.
Only it's a work to get about! You drag a ton of earth on your shoes."

"Why is it you have earth that's not sifted?" said Levin.

"Well, we crumble it up," answered Vassily, taking up some seed and
rolling the earth in their palms.

Vassily was not to blame for their having filled up their cart with
unsifted earth, but still it was annoying.

Levin had more than once already tried a way they knew for stifling their
anger, and turning all that seemed dark right again, and they tried that
way now. They watched how Mishka strode along, swinging the huge clods of
earth that clung to each foot; and getting off their horse, they took the
sieve from Vassily and started sowing themself.

"Where did you stop?"

Vassily pointed to the mark with their foot, and Levin went forward as
best they could, scattering the seed on the land. Walking was as
difficult as on a bog, and by the time Levin had ended the row they was
in a great heat, and they stopped and gave up the sieve to Vassily.

"Well, master, when summer's here, mind you don't scold me for these
rows," said Vassily.

"Eh?" said Levin cheerily, already feeling the effect of their method.

"Why, you'll see in the summer time. It'll look different. Look you
where I sowed last spring. How I did work at it! I do my best,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch, d'ye see, as I would for my own father. I
don't like bad work myself, nor would I let another person do it. What's
good for the master's good for us too. To look out yonder now," said
Vassily, pointing, "it does one's heart good."

"It's a lovely spring, Vassily."

"Why, it's a spring such as the old people don't remember the like of. I
was up home; an old person up there has sown wheat too, about an acre of
it. They was saying you wouldn't know it from rye."

"Have you been sowing wheat long?"

"Why, sir, it was you taught us the year before last. You gave me two
measures. We sold about eight bushels and sowed a rood."

"Well, mind you crumble up the clods," said Levin, going towards their
horse, "and keep an eye on Mishka. And if there's a good crop you shall
have half a rouble for every acre."

"Humbly thankful. We are very well content, sir, as it is."

Levin got on their horse and rode towards the field where was last year's
clover, and the one which was ploughed ready for the spring corn.

The crop of clover coming up in the stubble was magnificent. It had
survived everything, and stood up vividly green through the broken
stalks of last year's wheat. The horse sank in up to the pasterns, and
they drew each hoof with a sucking sound out of the half-thawed ground.
Over the ploughland riding was utterly impossible; the horse could only
keep a foothold where there was ice, and in the thawing furrows they sank
deep in at each step. The ploughland was in splendid condition; in a
couple of days it would be fit for harrowing and sowing. Everything was
capital, everything was cheering. Levin rode back across the streams,
hoping the water would have gone down. And they did in fact get across,
and startled two ducks. "There must be snipe too," they thought, and just
as they reached the turning homewards they met the forest keeper, who
confirmed their theory about the snipe.

Levin went home at a trot, so as to have time to eat their dinner and get
their gun ready for the evening.


Chapter 14

As they rode up to the house in the happiest frame of mind, Levin heard
the bell ring at the side of the principal entrance of the house.

"Yes, that's someone from the railway station," they thought, "just the
time to be here from the Moscow train ... Who could it be? What if it's
sibling Nikolay? They did say: 'Maybe I'll go to the waters, or maybe
I'll come down to you.'" They felt dismayed and vexed for the first
minute, that their sibling Nikolay's presence should come to disturb their
happy mood of spring. But they felt ashamed of the feeling, and at once
they opened, as it were, the arms of their soul, and with a softened
feeling of joy and expectation, now they hoped with all their heart that it
was their sibling. They pricked up their horse, and riding out from behind
the acacias they saw a hired three-horse sledge from the railway station,
and a person in a fur coat. It was not their sibling. "Oh, if it were
only some nice person one could talk to a little!" they thought.

"Ah," cried Levin joyfully, flinging up both their hands. "Here's a
delightful visitor! Ah, how glad I am to see you!" they shouted,
recognizing Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I shall find out for certain whether they's married, or when they's
going to be married," they thought. And on that delicious spring day they
felt that the thought of them did not hurt them at all.

"Well, you didn't expect me, eh?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting out
of the sledge, splashed with mud on the bridge of their nose, on their
cheek, and on their eyebrows, but radiant with health and good spirits.
"I've come to see you in the first place," they said, embracing and
kissing them, "to have some stand-shooting second, and to sell the
forest at Ergushovo third."

"Delightful! What a spring we're having! How ever did you get along in
a sledge?"

"In a cart it would have been worse still, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,"
answered the driver, who knew them.

"Well, I'm very, very glad to see you," said Levin, with a genuine
smile of childlike delight.

Levin led their friend to the room set apart for visitors, where Stepan
Arkadyevitch's things were carried also a bag, a gun in a case, a
satchel for cigars. Leaving them there to wash and change their clothes,
Levin went off to the counting house to speak about the ploughing and
clover. Agafea Mihalovna, always very anxious for the credit of the
house, met them in the hall with inquiries about dinner.

"Do just as you like, only let it be as soon as possible," they said, and
went to the bailiff.

When they came back, Stepan Arkadyevitch, washed and combed, came out of
their room with a beaming smile, and they went upstairs together.

"Well, I am glad I managed to get away to you! Now I shall understand
what the mysterious business is that you are always absorbed in here.
No, really, I envy you. What a house, how nice it all is! So bright, so
cheerful!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting that it was not always
spring and fine weather like that day. "And your nurse is simply
charming! A pretty maid in an apron might be even more agreeable,
perhaps; but for your severe monastic style it does very well."

Stepan Arkadyevitch told them many interesting pieces of news;
especially interesting to Levin was the news that their sibling, Sergey
Ivanovitch, was intending to pay them a visit in the summer.

Not one word did Stepan Arkadyevitch say in reference to Kitty and the
Shtcherbatskys; they merely gave them greetings from their partner. Levin was
grateful to them for their delicacy and was very glad of their visitor. As
always happened with them during their solitude, a mass of ideas and
feelings had been accumulating within them, which they could not
communicate to those about them. And now they poured out upon Stepan
Arkadyevitch their poetic joy in the spring, and their failures and plans
for the land, and their thoughts and criticisms on the books they had been
reading, and the idea of their own book, the basis of which really was,
though they was unaware of it themself, a criticism of all the old books
on agriculture. Stepan Arkadyevitch, always charming, understanding
everything at the slightest reference, was particularly charming on
this visit, and Levin noticed in them a special tenderness, as it were,
and a new tone of respect that flattered them.

The efforts of Agafea Mihalovna and the cook, that the dinner should be
particularly good, only ended in the two famished friends attacking the
preliminary course, eating a great deal of bread and butter, salt goose
and salted mushrooms, and in Levin's finally ordering the soup to be
served without the accompaniment of little pies, with which the cook
had particularly meant to impress their visitor. But though Stepan
Arkadyevitch was accustomed to very different dinners, they thought
everything excellent: the herb brandy, and the bread, and the butter,
and above all the salt goose and the mushrooms, and the nettle soup,
and the chicken in white sauce, and the white Crimean wine everything
was superb and delicious.

"Splendid, splendid!" they said, lighting a fat cigar after the roast. "I
feel as if, coming to you, I had landed on a peaceful shore after the
noise and jolting of a steamer. And so you maintain that the laborer
themself is an element to be studied and to regulate the choice of
methods in agriculture. Of course, I'm an ignorant outsider; but I
should fancy theory and its application will have its influence on the
laborer too."

"Yes, but wait a bit. I'm not talking of political economy, I'm talking
of the science of agriculture. It ought to be like the natural
sciences, and to observe given phenomena and the laborer in their
economic, ethnographical...."

At that instant Agafea Mihalovna came in with jam.

"Oh, Agafea Mihalovna," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, kissing the tips of
their plump fingers, "what salt goose, what herb brandy!... What do you
think, isn't it time to start, Kostya?" they added.

Levin looked out of the window at the sun sinking behind the bare
tree-tops of the forest.

"Yes, it's time," they said. "Kouzma, get ready the trap," and they ran
downstairs.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, going down, carefully took the canvas cover off
their varnished gun case with their own hands, and opening it, began to get
ready their expensive new-fashioned gun. Kouzma, who already scented a
big tip, never left Stepan Arkadyevitch's side, and put on them both their
stockings and boots, a task which Stepan Arkadyevitch readily left them.

"Kostya, give orders that if the merchant Ryabinin comes ... I told them
to come today, they's to be brought in and to wait for me...."

"Why, do you mean to say you're selling the forest to Ryabinin?"

"Yes. Do you know them?"

"To be sure I do. I have had to do business with them, 'positively and
conclusively.'"

Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed. "Positively and conclusively" were the
merchant's favorite words.

"Yes, it's wonderfully funny the way they talks. They knows where them
master's going!" they added, patting Laska, who hung about Levin, whining
and licking their hands, their boots, and their gun.

The trap was already at the steps when they went out.

"I told them to bring the trap round; or would you rather walk?"

"No, we'd better drive," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting into the
trap. They sat down, tucked the tiger-skin rug round them, and lighted a
cigar. "How is it you don't smoke? A cigar is a sort of thing, not
exactly a pleasure, but the crown and outward sign of pleasure. Come,
this is life! How splendid it is! This is how I should like to live!"

"Why, who prevents you?" said Levin, smiling.

"No, you're a lucky person! You've got everything you like. You like
horses and you have them; dogs you have them; shooting you have it;
farming you have it."

"Perhaps because I rejoice in what I have, and don't fret for what I
haven't," said Levin, thinking of Kitty.

Stepan Arkadyevitch comprehended, looked at them, but said nothing.

Levin was grateful to Oblonsky for noticing, with their never-failing
tact, that they dreaded conversation about the Shtcherbatskys, and so
saying nothing about them. But now Levin was longing to find out what
was tormenting them so, yet they had not the courage to begin.

"Come, tell me how things are going with you," said Levin, bethinking
themself that it was not nice of them to think only of themself.

Stepan Arkadyevitch's eyes sparkled merrily.

"You don't admit, I know, that one can be fond of new rolls when one
has had one's rations of bread to your mind it's a crime; but I don't
count life as life without love," they said, taking Levin's question their
own way. "What am I to do? I'm made that way. And really, one does so
little harm to anyone, and gives oneself so much pleasure...."

"What! is there something new, then?" queried Levin.

"Yes, my child, there is! There, do you see, you know the type of
Ossian's women.... People, such as one sees in dreams.... Well, these
people are sometimes to be met in reality ... and these people are
terrible. Person, don't you know, is such a subject that however much
you study it, it's always perfectly new."

"Well, then, it would be better not to study it."

"No. Some mathematician has said that enjoyment lies in the search for
truth, not in the finding it."

Levin listened in silence, and in spite of all the efforts they made, they
could not in the least enter into the feelings of their friend and
understand their sentiments and the charm of studying such people.


Chapter 15

The place fixed on for the stand-shooting was not far above a stream in
a little aspen copse. On reaching the copse, Levin got out of the trap
and led Oblonsky to a corner of a mossy, swampy glade, already quite
free from snow. They went back themself to a double birch tree on the
other side, and leaning their gun on the fork of a dead lower branch, they
took off their full overcoat, fastened their belt again, and worked their
arms to see if they were free.

Gray old Laska, who had followed them, sat down warily opposite them and
pricked up them ears. The sun was setting behind a thick forest, and in
the glow of sunset the birch trees, dotted about in the aspen copse,
stood out clearly with their hanging twigs, and their buds swollen
almost to bursting.

From the thickest parts of the copse, where the snow still remained,
came the faint sound of narrow winding threads of water running away.
Tiny birds twittered, and now and then fluttered from tree to tree.

In the pauses of complete stillness there came the rustle of last
year's leaves, stirred by the thawing of the earth and the growth of
the grass.

"Imagine! One can hear and see the grass growing!" Levin said to
themself, noticing a wet, slate-colored aspen leaf moving beside a blade
of young grass. They stood, listened, and gazed sometimes down at the wet
mossy ground, sometimes at Laska listening all alert, sometimes at the
sea of bare tree tops that stretched on the slope below them, sometimes
at the darkening sky, covered with white streaks of cloud.

A hawk flew high over a forest far away with slow sweep of its wings;
another flew with exactly the same motion in the same direction and
vanished. The birds twittered more and more loudly and busily in the
thicket. An owl hooted not far off, and Laska, starting, stepped
cautiously a few steps forward, and putting them head on one side, began
to listen intently. Beyond the stream was heard the cuckoo. Twice they
uttered them usual cuckoo call, and then gave a hoarse, hurried call and
broke down.

"Imagine! the cuckoo already!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out
from behind a bush.

"Yes, I hear it," answered Levin, reluctantly breaking the stillness
with their voice, which sounded disagreeable to themself. "Now it's
coming!"

Stepan Arkadyevitch's figure again went behind the bush, and Levin saw
nothing but the bright flash of a match, followed by the red glow and
blue smoke of a cigarette.

"Tchk! tchk!" came the snapping sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch cocking
their gun.

"What's that cry?" asked Oblonsky, drawing Levin's attention to a
prolonged cry, as though a colt were whinnying in a high voice, in
play.

"Oh, don't you know it? That's the hare. But enough talking! Listen,
it's flying!" almost shrieked Levin, cocking their gun.

They heard a shrill whistle in the distance, and in the exact time, so
well known to the sportsman, two seconds later another, a third, and
after the third whistle the hoarse, guttural cry could be heard.

Levin looked about them to right and to left, and there, just facing them
against the dusky blue sky above the confused mass of tender shoots of
the aspens, they saw the flying bird. It was flying straight towards them;
the guttural cry, like the even tearing of some strong stuff, sounded
close to their ear; the long beak and neck of the bird could be seen, and
at the very instant when Levin was taking aim, behind the bush where
Oblonsky stood, there was a flash of red lightning: the bird dropped
like an arrow, and darted upwards again. Again came the red flash and
the sound of a blow, and fluttering its wings as though trying to keep
up in the air, the bird halted, stopped still an instant, and fell with
a heavy splash on the slushy ground.

"Can I have missed it?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, who could not see
for the smoke.

"Here it is!" said Levin, pointing to Laska, who with one ear raised,
wagging the end of them shaggy tail, came slowly back as though they
would prolong the pleasure, and as it were smiling, brought the dead
bird to them master. "Well, I'm glad you were successful," said Levin,
who, at the same time, had a sense of envy that they had not succeeded in
shooting the snipe.

"It was a bad shot from the right barrel," responded Stepan
Arkadyevitch, loading their gun. "Sh... it's flying!"

The shrill whistles rapidly following one another were heard again. Two
snipe, playing and chasing one another, and only whistling, not crying,
flew straight at the very heads of the sportsmen. There was the report
of four shots, and like swallows the snipe turned swift somersaults in
the air and vanished from sight.



The stand-shooting was capital. Stepan Arkadyevitch shot two more birds
and Levin two, of which one was not found. It began to get dark. Venus,
bright and silvery, shone with them soft light low down in the west
behind the birch trees, and high up in the east twinkled the red lights
of Arcturus. Over their head Levin made out the stars of the Great Bear
and lost them again. The snipe had ceased flying; but Levin resolved to
stay a little longer, till Venus, which they saw below a branch of birch,
should be above it, and the stars of the Great Bear should be perfectly
plain. Venus had risen above the branch, and the ear of the Great Bear
with its shaft was now all plainly visible against the dark blue sky,
yet still they waited.

"Isn't it time to go home?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

It was quite still now in the copse, and not a bird was stirring.

"Let's stay a little while," answered Levin.

"As you like."

They were standing now about fifteen paces from one another.

"Stiva!" said Levin unexpectedly; "how is it you don't tell me whether
your sister-in-law's married yet, or when they's going to be?"

Levin felt so resolute and serene that no answer, they fancied, could
affect them. But they had never dreamed of what Stepan Arkadyevitch
replied.

"They's never thought of being married, and isn't thinking of it; but
they's very ill, and the doctors have sent them abroad. They're
positively afraid they may not live."

"What!" cried Levin. "Very ill? What is wrong with them? How has
she...?"

While they were saying this, Laska, with ears pricked up, was looking
upwards at the sky, and reproachfully at them.

"They have chosen a time to talk," they was thinking. "It's on the
wing.... Here it is, yes, it is. They'll miss it," thought Laska.

But at that very instant both suddenly heard a shrill whistle which, as
it were, smote on their ears, and both suddenly seized their guns and
two flashes gleamed, and two bangs sounded at the very same instant.
The snipe flying high above instantly folded its wings and fell into a
thicket, bending down the delicate shoots.

"Splendid! Together!" cried Levin, and they ran with Laska into the
thicket to look for the snipe.

"Oh, yes, what was it that was unpleasant?" they wondered. "Yes, Kitty's
ill.... Well, it can't be helped; I'm very sorry," they thought.

"They's found it! Isn't they a clever thing?" they said, taking the warm
bird from Laska's mouth and packing it into the almost full game bag.
"I've got it, Stiva!" they shouted.


Chapter 16

On the way home Levin asked all details of Kitty's illness and the
Shtcherbatskys' plans, and though they would have been ashamed to admit
it, they was pleased at what they heard. They was pleased that there was
still hope, and still more pleased that they should be suffering who had
made them suffer so much. But when Stepan Arkadyevitch began to speak of
the causes of Kitty's illness, and mentioned Vronsky's name, Levin cut
them short.

"I have no right whatever to know family matters, and, to tell the
truth, no interest in them either."

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled hardly perceptibly, catching the
instantaneous change they knew so well in Levin's face, which had become
as gloomy as it had been bright a minute before.

"Have you quite settled about the forest with Ryabinin?" asked Levin.

"Yes, it's settled. The price is magnificent; thirty-eight thousand.
Eight straight away, and the rest in six years. I've been bothering
about it for ever so long. No one would give more."

"Then you've as good as given away your forest for nothing," said Levin
gloomily.

"How do you mean for nothing?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
good-humored smile, knowing that nothing would be right in Levin's eyes
now.

"Because the forest is worth at least a hundred and fifty roubles the
acre," answered Levin.

"Oh, these farmers!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch playfully. "Your tone of
contempt for us poor townsfolk!... But when it comes to business, we do
it better than anyone. I assure you I have reckoned it all out," they
said, "and the forest is fetching a very good price so much so that I'm
afraid of this fellow's crying off, in fact. You know it's not
'timber,'" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, hoping by this distinction to
convince Levin completely of the unfairness of their doubts. "And it
won't run to more than twenty-five yards of fagots per acre, and they's
giving me at the rate of seventy roubles the acre."

Levin smiled contemptuously. "I know," they thought, "that fashion not
only in them, but in all city people, who, after being twice in ten
years in the country, pick up two or three phrases and use them in
season and out of season, firmly persuaded that they know all about it.
'_Timber, run to so many yards the acre._' They says those words without
understanding them themself."

"I wouldn't attempt to teach you what you write about in your office,"
said they, "and if need arose, I should come to you to ask about it. But
you're so positive you know all the lore of the forest. It's difficult.
Have you counted the trees?"

"How count the trees?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing, still trying
to draw their friend out of their ill-temper. "Earl the sands of the sea,
number the stars. Some higher power might do it."

"Oh, well, the higher power of Ryabinin can. Not a single merchant ever
buys a forest without counting the trees, unless they get it given them
for nothing, as you're doing now. I know your forest. I go there every
year shooting, and your forest's worth a hundred and fifty roubles an
acre paid down, while they's giving you sixty by installments. So that in
fact you're making them a present of thirty thousand."

"Come, don't let your imagination run away with you," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch piteously. "Why was it none would give it, then?"

"Why, because they has an understanding with the merchants; they's bought
them off. I've had to do with all of them; I know them. They're not
merchants, you know: they're speculators. They wouldn't look at a bargain
that gave them ten, fifteen per cent. profit, but holds back to buy a
rouble's worth for twenty kopecks."

"Well, enough of it! You're out of temper."

"Not the least," said Levin gloomily, as they drove up to the house.

At the steps there stood a trap tightly covered with iron and leather,
with a sleek horse tightly harnessed with broad collar-straps. In the
trap sat the chubby, tightly belted clerk who served Ryabinin as
coachman. Ryabinin themself was already in the house, and met the
friends in the hall. Ryabinin was a tall, thinnish, middle-aged person,
with mustache and a projecting clean-shaven chin, and prominent
muddy-looking eyes. They was dressed in a long-skirted blue coat, with
buttons below the waist at the back, and wore high boots wrinkled over
the ankles and straight over the calf, with big galoshes drawn over
them. They rubbed their face with their handkerchief, and wrapping round them
their coat, which sat extremely well as it was, they greeted them with a
smile, holding out their hand to Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though they wanted
to catch something.

"So here you are," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, giving them their hand.
"That's capital."

"I did not venture to disregard your excellency's commands, though the
road was extremely bad. I positively walked the whole way, but I am
here at my time. Konstantin Dmitrievitch, my respects"; they turned to
Levin, trying to seize their hand too. But Levin, scowling, made as
though they did not notice their hand, and took out the snipe. "Your honors
have been diverting yourselves with the chase? What kind of bird may it
be, pray?" added Ryabinin, looking contemptuously at the snipe: "a
great delicacy, I suppose." And they shook their head disapprovingly, as
though they had grave doubts whether this game were worth the candle.

"Would you like to go into my study?" Levin said in French to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, scowling morosely. "Go into my study; you can talk
there."

"Quite so, where you please," said Ryabinin with contemptuous dignity,
as though wishing to make it felt that others might be in difficulties
as to how to behave, but that they could never be in any difficulty about
anything.

On entering the study Ryabinin looked about, as their habit was, as
though seeking the holy picture, but when they had found it, they did not
cross themself. They scanned the bookcases and bookshelves, and with the
same dubious air with which they had regarded the snipe, they smiled
contemptuously and shook their head disapprovingly, as though by no means
willing to allow that this game were worth the candle.

"Well, have you brought the money?" asked Oblonsky. "Sit down."

"Oh, don't trouble about the money. I've come to see you to talk it
over."

"What is there to talk over? But do sit down."

"I don't mind if I do," said Ryabinin, sitting down and leaning their
elbows on the back of their chair in a position of the intensest
discomfort to themself. "You must knock it down a bit, prince. It would
be too bad. The money is ready conclusively to the last farthing. As to
paying the money down, there'll be no hitch there."

Levin, who had meanwhile been putting their gun away in the cupboard, was
just going out of the door, but catching the merchant's words, they
stopped.

"Why, you've got the forest for nothing as it is," they said. "They came to
me too late, or I'd have fixed the price for them."

Ryabinin got up, and in silence, with a smile, they looked Levin down and
up.

"Very close about money is Konstantin Dmitrievitch," they said with a
smile, turning to Stepan Arkadyevitch; "there's positively no dealing
with them. I was bargaining for some wheat of them, and a pretty price I
offered too."

"Why should I give you my goods for nothing? I didn't pick it up on the
ground, nor steal it either."

"Mercy on us! nowadays there's no chance at all of stealing. With the
open courts and everything done in style, nowadays there's no question
of stealing. We are just talking things over like people. Their
excellency's asking too much for the forest. I can't make both ends
meet over it. I must ask for a little concession."

"But is the thing settled between you or not? If it's settled, it's
useless haggling; but if it's not," said Levin, "I'll buy the forest."

The smile vanished at once from Ryabinin's face. A hawklike, greedy,
cruel expression was left upon it. With rapid, bony fingers they
unbuttoned their coat, revealing a shirt, bronze waistcoat buttons, and a
watch chain, and quickly pulled out a fat old pocketbook.

"Here you are, the forest is mine," they said, crossing themself quickly,
and holding out their hand. "Take the money; it's my forest. That's
Ryabinin's way of doing business; they doesn't haggle over every
half-penny," they added, scowling and waving the pocketbook.

"I wouldn't be in a hurry if I were you," said Levin.

"Come, really," said Oblonsky in surprise. "I've given my word, you
know."

Levin went out of the room, slamming the door. Ryabinin looked towards
the door and shook their head with a smile.

"It's all youthfulness positively nothing but boyishness. Why, I'm
buying it, upon my honor, simply, believe me, for the glory of it, that
Ryabinin, and no one else, should have bought the copse of Oblonsky.
And as to the profits, why, I must make what God gives. In God's name.
If you would kindly sign the title-deed...."

Within an hour the merchant, stroking their big overcoat neatly down, and
hooking up their jacket, with the agreement in their pocket, seated themself
in their tightly covered trap, and drove homewards.

"Ugh, these gentlefolks!" they said to the clerk. "They they're a nice
lot!"

"That's so," responded the clerk, handing them the reins and buttoning
the leather apron. "But I can congratulate you on the purchase, Mihail
Ignatitch?"

"Well, well...."


Chapter 17

Stepan Arkadyevitch went upstairs with their pocket bulging with notes,
which the merchant had paid them for three months in advance. The
business of the forest was over, the money in their pocket; their
shooting had been excellent, and Stepan Arkadyevitch was in the
happiest frame of mind, and so they felt specially anxious to dissipate
the ill-humor that had come upon Levin. They wanted to finish the day at
supper as pleasantly as it had been begun.

Levin certainly was out of humor, and in spite of all their desire to be
affectionate and cordial to their charming visitor, they could not control
their mood. The intoxication of the news that Kitty was not married had
gradually begun to work upon them.

Kitty was not married, but ill, and ill from love for a person who had
slighted them. This slight, as it were, rebounded upon them. Vronsky had
slighted them, and they had slighted them, Levin. Consequently Vronsky had
the right to despise Levin, and therefore they was their enemy. But all
this Levin did not think out. They vaguely felt that there was something
in it insulting to them, and they was not angry now at what had disturbed
them, but they fell foul of everything that presented itself. The stupid
sale of the forest, the fraud practiced upon Oblonsky and concluded in
their house, exasperated them.

"Well, finished?" they said, meeting Stepan Arkadyevitch upstairs. "Would
you like supper?"

"Well, I wouldn't say no to it. What an appetite I get in the country!
Wonderful! Why didn't you offer Ryabinin something?"

"Oh, damn them!"

"Still, how you do treat them!" said Oblonsky. "You didn't even shake
hands with them. Why not shake hands with them?"

"Because I don't shake hands with a waiter, and a waiter's a hundred
times better than they is."

"What a reactionist you are, really! What about the amalgamation of
classes?" said Oblonsky.

"Anyone who likes amalgamating is welcome to it, but it sickens me."

"You're a regular reactionist, I see."

"Really, I have never considered what I am. I am Konstantin Levin, and
nothing else."

"And Konstantin Levin very much out of temper," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling.

"Yes, I am out of temper, and do you know why? Because excuse me of
your stupid sale...."

Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned good-humoredly, like one who feels themself
teased and attacked for no fault of their own.

"Come, enough about it!" they said. "When did anybody ever sell anything
without being told immediately after the sale, 'It was worth much
more'? But when one wants to sell, no one will give anything.... No, I
see you've a grudge against that unlucky Ryabinin."

"Maybe I have. And do you know why? You'll say again that I'm a
reactionist, or some other terrible word; but all the same it does
annoy and anger me to see on all sides the impoverishing of the
nobility to which I belong, and, in spite of the amalgamation of
classes, I'm glad to belong. And their impoverishment is not due to
extravagance that would be nothing; living in good style that's the
proper thing for noblemen; it's only the nobles who know how to do it.
Now the peasants about us buy land, and I don't mind that. The
person does nothing, while the peasant works and supplants the idle
person. That's as it ought to be. And I'm very glad for the peasant. But I
do mind seeing the process of impoverishment from a sort of I don't
know what to call it innocence. Here a Polish speculator bought for
half its value a magnificent estate from a young person who lives in
Nice. And there a merchant will get three acres of land, worth ten
roubles, as security for the loan of one rouble. Here, for no kind of
reason, you've made that rascal a present of thirty thousand roubles."

"Well, what should I have done? Counted every tree?"

"Of course, they must be counted. You didn't count them, but Ryabinin
did. Ryabinin's children will have means of livelihood and education,
while yours maybe will not!"

"Well, you must excuse me, but there's something mean in this counting.
We have our business and they have theirs, and they must make their
profit. Anyway, the thing's done, and there's an end of it. And here
come some poached eggs, my favorite dish. And Agafea Mihalovna will
give us that marvelous herb-brandy...."

Stepan Arkadyevitch sat down at the table and began joking with Agafea
Mihalovna, assuring them that it was long since they had tasted such a
dinner and such a supper.

"Well, you do praise it, anyway," said Agafea Mihalovna, "but
Konstantin Dmitrievitch, give them what you will a crust of bread they'll
eat it and walk away."

Though Levin tried to control themself, they was gloomy and silent. They
wanted to put one question to Stepan Arkadyevitch, but they could not
bring themself to the point, and could not find the words or the moment
in which to put it. Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone down to their room,
undressed, again washed, and attired in a nightshirt with goffered
frills, they had got into bed, but Levin still lingered in their room,
talking of various trifling matters, and not daring to ask what they
wanted to know.

"How wonderfully they make this soap," they said gazing at a piece of
soap they was handling, which Agafea Mihalovna had put ready for the
visitor but Oblonsky had not used. "Only look; why, it's a work of
art."

"Yes, everything's brought to such a pitch of perfection nowadays,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a moist and blissful yawn. "The theater,
for instance, and the entertainments ... a a a!" they yawned. "The
electric light everywhere ... a a a!"

"Yes, the electric light," said Levin. "Yes. Oh, and where's Vronsky
now?" they asked suddenly, laying down the soap.

"Vronsky?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, checking their yawn; "they's in
Petersburg. They left soon after you did, and they's not once been in
Moscow since. And do you know, Kostya, I'll tell you the truth," they
went on, leaning their elbow on the table, and propping on their hand their
handsome ruddy face, in which their moist, good-natured, sleepy eyes
shone like stars. "It's your own fault. You took fright at the sight of
your rival. But, as I told you at the time, I couldn't say which had
the better chance. Why didn't you fight it out? I told you at the time
that...." They yawned inwardly, without opening their mouth.

"Does they know, or doesn't they, that I did make an offer?" Levin
wondered, gazing at them. "Yes, there's something humbugging, diplomatic
in their face," and feeling they was blushing, they looked Stepan
Arkadyevitch straight in the face without speaking.

"If there was anything on them side at the time, it was nothing but a
superficial attraction," pursued Oblonsky. "Their being such a perfect
aristocrat, don't you know, and their future position in society, had an
influence not with them, but with them mother."

Levin scowled. The humiliation of their rejection stung them to the heart,
as though it were a fresh wound they had only just received. But they was
at home, and the walls of home are a support.

"Stay, stay," they began, interrupting Oblonsky. "You talk of their being
an aristocrat. But allow me to ask what it consists in, that
aristocracy of Vronsky or of anybody else, beside which I can be looked
down upon? You consider Vronsky an aristocrat, but I don't. A person whose
father crawled up from nothing at all by intrigue, and whose mother God
knows whom they wasn't mixed up with.... No, excuse me, but I consider
myself aristocratic, and people like me, who can point back in the past
to three or four honorable generations of their family, of the highest
degree of breeding (talent and intellect, of course that's another
matter), and have never curried favor with anyone, never depended on
anyone for anything, like my father and my grandfather. And I know many
such. You think it mean of me to count the trees in my forest, while
you make Ryabinin a present of thirty thousand; but you get rents from
your lands and I don't know what, while I don't and so I prize what's
come to me from my ancestors or been won by hard work.... We are
aristocrats, and not those who can only exist by favor of the powerful
of this world, and who can be bought for twopence halfpenny."

"Well, but whom are you attacking? I agree with you," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, sincerely and genially; though they was aware that in the
class of those who could be bought for twopence halfpenny Levin was
reckoning them too. Levin's warmth gave them genuine pleasure. "Whom are
you attacking? Though a good deal is not true that you say about
Vronsky, but I won't talk about that. I tell you straight out, if I
were you, I should go back with me to Moscow, and...."

"No; I don't know whether you know it or not, but I don't care. And I
tell you I did make an offer and was rejected, and Katerina
Alexandrovna is nothing now to me but a painful and humiliating
reminiscence."

"What ever for? What nonsense!"

"But we won't talk about it. Please forgive me, if I've been nasty,"
said Levin. Now that they had opened their heart, they became as they had been
in the morning. "You're not angry with me, Stiva? Please don't be
angry," they said, and smiling, they took their hand.

"Of course not; not a bit, and no reason to be. I'm glad we've spoken
openly. And do you know, stand-shooting in the morning is unusually
good why not go? I couldn't sleep the night anyway, but I might go
straight from shooting to the station."

"Capital."


Chapter 18

Although all Vronsky's inner life was absorbed in their passion, their
external life unalterably and inevitably followed along the old
accustomed lines of their social and regimental ties and interests. The
interests of their regiment took an important place in Vronsky's life,
both because they was fond of the regiment, and because the regiment was
fond of them. They were not only fond of Vronsky in their regiment, they
respected them too, and were proud of them; proud that this person, with their
immense wealth, their brilliant education and abilities, and the path
open before them to every kind of success, distinction, and ambition,
had disregarded all that, and of all the interests of life had the
interests of their regiment and their comrades nearest to their heart.
Vronsky was aware of their comrades' view of them, and in addition to their
liking for the life, they felt bound to keep up that reputation.

It need not be said that they did not speak of their love to any of their
comrades, nor did they betray their secret even in the wildest drinking
bouts (though indeed they was never so drunk as to lose all control of
themself). And they shut up any of their thoughtless comrades who attempted
to allude to their connection. But in spite of that, their love was known
to all the town; everyone guessed with more or less confidence at their
relations with Madame Karenina. The majority of the younger people envied
them for just what was the most irksome factor in their love the exalted
position of Karenin, and the consequent publicity of their connection
in society.

The greater number of the young people, who envied Anna and had long
been weary of hearing them called _virtuous_, rejoiced at the
fulfillment of their predictions, and were only waiting for a decisive
turn in public opinion to fall upon them with all the weight of their
scorn. They were already making ready their handfuls of mud to fling at
them when the right moment arrived. The greater number of the
middle-aged people and certain great personages were displeased at the
prospect of the impending scandal in society.

Vronsky's mother, on hearing of their connection, was at first pleased at
it, because nothing to them mind gave such a finishing touch to a
brilliant young person as a _liaison_ in the highest society; they was
pleased, too, that Madame Karenina, who had so taken them fancy, and had
talked so much of them child, was, after all, just like all other pretty
and well-bred people, at least according to the Earl Vronskaya's
ideas. But they had heard of late that them child had refused a position
offered them of great importance to their career, simply in order to
remain in the regiment, where they could be constantly seeing Madame
Karenina. They learned that great personages were displeased with them on
this account, and they changed them opinion. They was vexed, too, that
from all they could learn of this connection it was not that brilliant,
graceful, worldly _liaison_ which they would have welcomed, but a sort
of Wertherish, desperate passion, so they was told, which might well
lead them into imprudence. They had not seen them since their abrupt
departure from Moscow, and they sent them elder child to bid them come to
see them.

This elder child, too, was displeased with their younger sibling. They did
not distinguish what sort of love their might be, big or little,
passionate or passionless, lasting or passing (they kept a ballet child
themself, though they was the father of a family, so they was lenient in
these matters), but they knew that this love affair was viewed with
displeasure by those whom it was necessary to please, and therefore they
did not approve of their sibling's conduct.

Besides the service and society, Vronsky had another great
interest horses; they was passionately fond of horses.

That year races and a steeplechase had been arranged for the officers.
Vronsky had put their name down, bought a thoroughbred English mare, and
in spite of their love affair, they was looking forward to the races with
intense, though reserved, excitement....

These two passions did not interfere with one another. On the contrary,
they needed occupation and distraction quite apart from their love, so as
to recruit and rest themself from the violent emotions that agitated
them.


Chapter 19

On the day of the races at Krasnoe Selo, Vronsky had come earlier than
usual to eat beefsteak in the common messroom of the regiment. They had
no need to be strict with themself, as they had very quickly been brought
down to the required light weight; but still they had to avoid gaining
flesh, and so they eschewed farinaceous and sweet dishes. They sat with their
coat unbuttoned over a white waistcoat, resting both elbows on the
table, and while waiting for the steak they had ordered they looked at a
French novel that lay open on their plate. They was only looking at the
book to avoid conversation with the officers coming in and out; they was
thinking.

They was thinking of Anna's promise to see them that day after the races.
But they had not seen them for three days, and as them partner had just
returned from abroad, they did not know whether they would be able to meet
them today or not, and they did not know how to find out. They had had their
last interview with them at their cousin Betsy's summer villa. They visited
the Karenins' summer villa as rarely as possible. Now they wanted to go
there, and they pondered the question how to do it.

"Of course I shall say Betsy has sent me to ask whether they's coming to
the races. Of course, I'll go," they decided, lifting their head from the
book. And as they vividly pictured the happiness of seeing them, their face
lighted up.

"Send to my house, and tell them to have out the carriage and three
horses as quick as they can," they said to the servant, who handed them
the steak on a hot silver dish, and moving the dish up they began eating.

From the billiard room next door came the sound of balls knocking, of
talk and laughter. Two officers appeared at the entrance-door: one, a
young fellow, with a feeble, delicate face, who had lately joined the
regiment from the Corps of Pages; the other, a plump, elderly officer,
with a bracelet on their wrist, and little eyes, lost in fat.

Vronsky glanced at them, frowned, and looking down at their book as
though they had not noticed them, they proceeded to eat and read at the
same time.

"What? Fortifying yourself for your work?" said the plump officer,
sitting down beside them.

"As you see," responded Vronsky, knitting their brows, wiping their mouth,
and not looking at the officer.

"So you're not afraid of getting fat?" said the latter, turning a chair
round for the young officer.

"What?" said Vronsky angrily, making a wry face of disgust, and showing
their even teeth.

"You're not afraid of getting fat?"

"Waiter, sherry!" said Vronsky, without replying, and moving the book
to the other side of them, they went on reading.

The plump officer took up the list of wines and turned to the young
officer.

"You choose what we're to drink," they said, handing them the card, and
looking at them.

"Rhine wine, please," said the young officer, stealing a timid glance
at Vronsky, and trying to pull their scarcely visible mustache. Seeing
that Vronsky did not turn round, the young officer got up.

"Let's go into the billiard room," they said.

The plump officer rose submissively, and they moved towards the door.

At that moment there walked into the room the tall and well-built
Captain Yashvin. Nodding with an air of lofty contempt to the two
officers, they went up to Vronsky.

"Ah! here they is!" they cried, bringing their big hand down heavily on their
epaulet. Vronsky looked round angrily, but their face lighted up
immediately with their characteristic expression of genial and manly
serenity.

"That's it, Alexey," said the captain, in their loud baritone. "You must
just eat a mouthful, now, and drink only one tiny glass."

"Oh, I'm not hungry."

"There go the inseparables," Yashvin dropped, glancing sarcastically at
the two officers who were at that instant leaving the room. And they bent
their long legs, swathed in tight riding breeches, and sat down in the
chair, too low for them, so that their knees were cramped up in a sharp
angle.

"Why didn't you turn up at the Red Theater yesterday? Numerova wasn't
at all bad. Where were you?"

"I was late at the Tverskoys'," said Vronsky.

"Ah!" responded Yashvin.

Yashvin, a gambler and a rake, a person not merely without moral
principles, but of immoral principles, Yashvin was Vronsky's greatest
friend in the regiment. Vronsky liked them both for their exceptional
physical strength, which they showed for the most part by being able to
drink like a fish, and do without sleep without being in the slightest
degree affected by it; and for their great strength of character, which
they showed in their relations with their comrades and superior officers,
commanding both fear and respect, and also at cards, when they would play
for tens of thousands and however much they might have drunk, always with
such skill and decision that they was reckoned the best player in the
English Club. Vronsky respected and liked Yashvin particularly because
they felt Yashvin liked them, not for their name and their money, but for
themself. And of all people they was the only one with whom Vronsky would
have liked to speak of their love. They felt that Yashvin, in spite of their
apparent contempt for every sort of feeling, was the only person who
could, so they fancied, comprehend the intense passion which now filled
their whole life. Moreover, they felt certain that Yashvin, as it was, took
no delight in gossip and scandal, and interpreted their feeling rightly,
that is to say, knew and believed that this passion was not a jest, not
a pastime, but something more serious and important.

Vronsky had never spoken to them of their passion, but they was aware that
they knew all about it, and that they put the right interpretation on it,
and they was glad to see that in their eyes.

"Ah! yes," they said, to the announcement that Vronsky had been at the
Tverskoys'; and their black eyes shining, they plucked at their left
mustache, and began twisting it into their mouth, a bad habit they had.

"Well, and what did you do yesterday? Win anything?" asked Vronsky.

"Eight thousand. But three don't count; they won't pay up."

"Oh, then you can afford to lose over me," said Vronsky, laughing.
(Yashvin had bet heavily on Vronsky in the races.)

"No chance of my losing. Mahotin's the only one that's risky."

And the conversation passed to forecasts of the coming race, the only
thing Vronsky could think of just now.

"Come along, I've finished," said Vronsky, and getting up they went to
the door. Yashvin got up too, stretching their long legs and their long
back.

"It's too early for me to dine, but I must have a drink. I'll come
along directly. Hi, wine!" they shouted, in their rich voice, that always
rang out so loudly at drill, and set the windows shaking now.

"No, all right," they shouted again immediately after. "You're going
home, so I'll go with you."

And they walked out with Vronsky.


Chapter 20

Vronsky was staying in a roomy, clean, Finnish hut, divided into two by
a partition. Petritsky lived with them in camp too. Petritsky was asleep
when Vronsky and Yashvin came into the hut.

"Get up, don't go on sleeping," said Yashvin, going behind the
partition and giving Petritsky, who was lying with ruffled hair and
with their nose in the pillow, a prod on the shoulder.

Petritsky jumped up suddenly onto their knees and looked round.

"Your sibling's been here," they said to Vronsky. "They waked me up, damn
them, and said he'd look in again." And pulling up the rug they flung
themself back on the pillow. "Oh, do shut up, Yashvin!" they said, getting
furious with Yashvin, who was pulling the rug off them. "Shut up!" They
turned over and opened their eyes. "You'd better tell me what to drink;
such a nasty taste in my mouth, that...."

"Brandy's better than anything," boomed Yashvin. "Tereshtchenko! brandy
for your master and cucumbers," they shouted, obviously taking pleasure
in the sound of their own voice.

"Brandy, do you think? Eh?" queried Petritsky, blinking and rubbing their
eyes. "And you'll drink something? All right then, we'll have a drink
together! Vronsky, have a drink?" said Petritsky, getting up and
wrapping the tiger-skin rug round them. They went to the door of the
partition wall, raised their hands, and hummed in French, "There was a
king in Thule." "Vronsky, will you have a drink?"

"Go along," said Vronsky, putting on the coat their valet handed to them.

"Where are you off to?" asked Yashvin. "Oh, here are your three
horses," they added, seeing the carriage drive up.

"To the stables, and I've got to see Bryansky, too, about the horses,"
said Vronsky.

Vronsky had as a fact promised to call at Bryansky's, some eight miles
from Peterhof, and to bring them some money owing for some horses; and
they hoped to have time to get that in too. But their comrades were at once
aware that they was not only going there.

Petritsky, still humming, winked and made a pout with their lips, as
though they would say: "Oh, yes, we know your Bryansky."

"Mind you're not late!" was Yashvin's only comment; and to change the
conversation: "How's my roan? is they doing all right?" they inquired,
looking out of the window at the middle one of the three horses, which
they had sold Vronsky.

"Stop!" cried Petritsky to Vronsky as they was just going out. "Your
sibling left a letter and a note for you. Wait a bit; where are they?"

Vronsky stopped.

"Well, where are they?"

"Where are they? That's just the question!" said Petritsky solemnly,
moving their forefinger upwards from their nose.

"Come, tell me; this is silly!" said Vronsky smiling.

"I have not lighted the fire. Here somewhere about."

"Come, enough fooling! Where is the letter?"

"No, I've forgotten really. Or was it a dream? Wait a bit, wait a bit!
But what's the use of getting in a rage. If you'd drunk four bottles
yesterday as I did you'd forget where you were lying. Wait a bit, I'll
remember!"

Petritsky went behind the partition and lay down on their bed.

"Wait a bit! This was how I was lying, and this was how they was
standing. Yes yes yes.... Here it is!" and Petritsky pulled a letter
out from under the mattress, where they had hidden it.

Vronsky took the letter and their sibling's note. It was the letter they
was expecting from their mother, reproaching them for not having been to
see them and the note was from their sibling to say that they must have a
little talk with them. Vronsky knew that it was all about the same
thing. "What business is it of theirs!" thought Vronsky, and crumpling
up the letters they thrust them between the buttons of their coat so as to
read them carefully on the road. In the porch of the hut they was met by
two officers; one of their regiment and one of another.

Vronsky's quarters were always a meeting place for all the officers.

"Where are you off to?"

"I must go to Peterhof."

"Has the mare come from Tsarskoe?"

"Yes, but I've not seen them yet."

"They say Mahotin's Gladiator's lame."

"Nonsense! But however are you going to race in this mud?" said the
other.

"Here are my saviors!" cried Petritsky, seeing them come in. Before them
stood the orderly with a tray of brandy and salted cucumbers. "Here's
Yashvin ordering me to drink a pick-me-up."

"Well, you did give it to us yesterday," said one of those who had come
in; "you didn't let us get a wink of sleep all night."

"Oh, didn't we make a pretty finish!" said Petritsky. "Volkov climbed
onto the roof and began telling us how sad they was. I said: 'Let's have
music, the funeral march!' They fairly dropped asleep on the roof over
the funeral march."

"Drink it up; you positively must drink the brandy, and then seltzer
water and a lot of lemon," said Yashvin, standing over Petritsky like a
mother making a child take medicine, "and then a little champagne just
a small bottle."

"Come, there's some sense in that. Stop a bit, Vronsky. We'll all have
a drink."

"No; good-bye all of you. I'm not going to drink today."

"Why, are you gaining weight? All right, then we must have it alone.
Give us the seltzer water and lemon."

"Vronsky!" shouted someone when they was already outside.

"Well?"

"You'd better get your hair cut, it'll weigh you down, especially at
the top."

Vronsky was in fact beginning, prematurely, to get a little bald. They
laughed gaily, showing their even teeth, and pulling their cap over the
thin place, went out and got into their carriage.

"To the stables!" they said, and was just pulling out the letters to read
them through, but they thought better of it, and put off reading them so
as not to distract their attention before looking at the mare. "Later!"


Chapter 21

The temporary stable, a wooden shed, had been put up close to the race
course, and there their mare was to have been taken the previous day. They
had not yet seen them there.

During the last few days they had not ridden them out for exercise
themself, but had put them in the charge of the trainer, and so now they
positively did not know in what condition their mare had arrived
yesterday and was today. They had scarcely got out of their carriage when
their groom, the so-called "stable child," recognizing the carriage some
way off, called the trainer. A dry-looking Englishman, in high boots
and a short jacket, clean-shaven, except for a tuft below their chin,
came to meet them, walking with the uncouth gait of jockey, turning their
elbows out and swaying from side to side.

"Well, how's Frou-Frou?" Vronsky asked in English.

"All right, sir," the Englishman's voice responded somewhere in the
inside of their throat. "Better not go in," they added, touching their hat.
"I've put a muzzle on them, and the mare's fidgety. Better not go in,
it'll excite the mare."

"No, I'm going in. I want to look at them."

"Come along, then," said the Englishman, frowning, and speaking with
their mouth shut, and, with swinging elbows, they went on in front with their
disjointed gait.

They went into the little yard in front of the shed. A stable child,
spruce and smart in their holiday attire, met them with a broom in their
hand, and followed them. In the shed there were five horses in their
separate stalls, and Vronsky knew that their chief rival, Gladiator, a
very tall chestnut horse, had been brought there, and must be standing
among them. Even more than their mare, Vronsky longed to see Gladiator,
whom they had never seen. But they knew that by the etiquette of the race
course it was not merely impossible for them to see the horse, but
improper even to ask questions about them. Just as they was passing along
the passage, the child opened the door into the second horse-box on the
left, and Vronsky caught a glimpse of a big chestnut horse with white
legs. They knew that this was Gladiator, but, with the feeling of a person
turning away from the sight of another person's open letter, they turned
round and went into Frou-Frou's stall.

"The horse is here belonging to Mak... Mak... I never can say the
name," said the Englishman, over their shoulder, pointing their big finger
and dirty nail towards Gladiator's stall.

"Mahotin? Yes, they's my most serious rival," said Vronsky.

"If you were riding them," said the Englishman, "I'd bet on you."

"Frou-Frou's more nervous; they's stronger," said Vronsky, smiling at the
compliment to their riding.

"In a steeplechase it all depends on riding and on pluck," said the
Englishman.

Of pluck that is, energy and courage Vronsky did not merely feel that
they had enough; what was of far more importance, they was firmly convinced
that no one in the world could have more of this "pluck" than they had.

"Don't you think I want more thinning down?"

"Oh, no," answered the Englishman. "Please, don't speak loud. The
mare's fidgety," they added, nodding towards the horse-box, before which
they were standing, and from which came the sound of restless stamping
in the straw.

They opened the door, and Vronsky went into the horse-box, dimly lighted
by one little window. In the horse-box stood a dark bay mare, with a
muzzle on, picking at the fresh straw with them hoofs. Looking round them
in the twilight of the horse-box, Vronsky unconsciously took in once
more in a comprehensive glance all the points of their favorite mare.
Frou-Frou was a beast of medium size, not altogether free from
reproach, from a breeder's point of view. They was small-boned all over;
though them chest was extremely prominent in front, it was narrow. Them
hind-quarters were a little drooping, and in them fore-legs, and still
more in them hind-legs, there was a noticeable curvature. The muscles of
both hind- and fore-legs were not very thick; but across them shoulders
the mare was exceptionally broad, a peculiarity specially striking now
that they was lean from training. The bones of them legs below the knees
looked no thicker than a finger from in front, but were extraordinarily
thick seen from the side. They looked altogether, except across the
shoulders, as it were, pinched in at the sides and pressed out in
depth. But they had in the highest degree the quality that makes all
defects forgotten: that quality was _blood_, the blood _that tells_, as
the English expression has it. The muscles stood up sharply under the
network of sinews, covered with the delicate, mobile skin, soft as
satin, and they were hard as bone. Them clean-cut head, with prominent,
bright, spirited eyes, broadened out at the open nostrils, that showed
the red blood in the cartilage within. About all them figure, and
especially them head, there was a certain expression of energy, and, at
the same time, of softness. They was one of those creatures which seem
only not to speak because the mechanism of their mouth does not allow
them to.

To Vronsky, at any rate, it seemed that they understood all they felt at
that moment, looking at them.

Directly Vronsky went towards them, they drew in a deep breath, and,
turning back them prominent eye till the white looked bloodshot, they
started at the approaching figures from the opposite side, shaking them
muzzle, and shifting lightly from one leg to the other.

"There, you see how fidgety they is," said the Englishman.

"There, darling! There!" said Vronsky, going up to the mare and
speaking soothingly to them.

But the nearer they came, the more excited they grew. Only when they stood
by them head, they was suddenly quieter, while the muscles quivered under
them soft, delicate coat. Vronsky patted them strong neck, straightened
over them sharp withers a stray lock of them mane that had fallen on the
other side, and moved their face near them dilated nostrils, transparent
as a bat's wing. They drew a loud breath and snorted out through them
tense nostrils, started, pricked up them sharp ear, and put out them
strong, black lip towards Vronsky, as though they would nip hold of their
sleeve. But remembering the muzzle, they shook it and again began
restlessly stamping one after the other them shapely legs.

"Quiet, darling, quiet!" they said, patting them again over them
hind-quarters; and with a glad sense that their mare was in the best
possible condition, they went out of the horse-box.

The mare's excitement had infected Vronsky. They felt that their heart was
throbbing, and that they, too, like the mare, longed to move, to bite; it
was both dreadful and delicious.

"Well, I rely on you, then," they said to the Englishman; "half-past six
on the ground."

"All right," said the Englishman. "Oh, where are you going, my lord?"
they asked suddenly, using the title "my lord," which they had scarcely
ever used before.

Vronsky in amazement raised their head, and stared, as they knew how to
stare, not into the Englishman's eyes, but at their forehead, astounded
at the impertinence of their question. But realizing that in asking this
the Englishman had been looking at them not as an employer, but as a
jockey, they answered:

"I've got to go to Bryansky's; I shall be home within an hour."

"How often I'm asked that question today!" they said to themself, and they
blushed, a thing which rarely happened to them. The Englishman looked
gravely at them; and, as though they, too, knew where Vronsky was going,
they added:

"The great thing's to keep quiet before a race," said they; "don't get
out of temper or upset about anything."

"All right," answered Vronsky, smiling; and jumping into their carriage,
they told the person to drive to Peterhof.

Before they had driven many paces away, the dark clouds that had been
threatening rain all day broke, and there was a heavy downpour of rain.

"What a pity!" thought Vronsky, putting up the roof of the carriage.
"It was muddy before, now it will be a perfect swamp." As they sat in
solitude in the closed carriage, they took out their mother's letter and
their sibling's note, and read them through.

Yes, it was the same thing over and over again. Everyone, their mother,
their sibling, everyone thought fit to interfere in the affairs of their
heart. This interference aroused in them a feeling of angry hatred a
feeling they had rarely known before. "What business is it of theirs? Why
does everybody feel called upon to concern themself about me? And why do
they worry me so? Just because they see that this is something they
can't understand. If it were a common, vulgar, worldly intrigue, they
would have left me alone. They feel that this is something different,
that this is not a mere pastime, that this person is dearer to me than
life. And this is incomprehensible, and that's why it annoys them.
Whatever our destiny is or may be, we have made it ourselves, and we do
not complain of it," they said, in the word _we_ linking themself with
Anna. "No, they must needs teach us how to live. They haven't an idea
of what happiness is; they don't know that without our love, for us
there is neither happiness nor unhappiness no life at all," they thought.

They was angry with all of them for their interference just because they
felt in their soul that they, all these people, were right. They felt that
the love that bound them to Anna was not a momentary impulse, which
would pass, as worldly intrigues do pass, leaving no other traces in
the life of either but pleasant or unpleasant memories. They felt all the
torture of their own and them position, all the difficulty there was for
them, conspicuous as they were in the eye of all the world, in
concealing their love, in lying and deceiving; and in lying, deceiving,
feigning, and continually thinking of others, when the passion that
united them was so intense that they were both oblivious of everything
else but their love.

They vividly recalled all the constantly recurring instances of
inevitable necessity for lying and deceit, which were so against their
natural bent. They recalled particularly vividly the shame they had more
than once detected in them at this necessity for lying and deceit. And
they experienced the strange feeling that had sometimes come upon them
since their secret love for Anna. This was a feeling of loathing for
something whether for Alexey Alexandrovitch, or for themself, or for the
whole world, they could not have said. But they always drove away this
strange feeling. Now, too, they shook it off and continued the thread of
their thoughts.

"Yes, they was unhappy before, but proud and at peace; and now they
cannot be at peace and feel secure in them dignity, though they does not
show it. Yes, we must put an end to it," they decided.

And for the first time the idea clearly presented itself that it was
essential to put an end to this false position, and the sooner the
better. "Throw up everything, they and I, and hide ourselves somewhere
alone with our love," they said to themself.


Chapter 22

The rain did not last long, and by the time Vronsky arrived, their
shaft-horse trotting at full speed and dragging the trace-horses
galloping through the mud, with their reins hanging loose, the sun had
peeped out again, the roofs of the summer villas and the old limetrees
in the gardens on both sides of the principal streets sparkled with wet
brilliance, and from the twigs came a pleasant drip and from the roofs
rushing streams of water. They thought no more of the shower spoiling the
race course, but was rejoicing now that thanks to the rain they would be
sure to find them at home and alone, as they knew that Alexey
Alexandrovitch, who had lately returned from a foreign watering place,
had not moved from Petersburg.

Hoping to find them alone, Vronsky alighted, as they always did, to avoid
attracting attention, before crossing the bridge, and walked to the
house. They did not go up the steps to the street door, but went into the
court.

"Has your master come?" they asked a gardener.

"No, sir. The mistress is at home. But will you please go to the front
door; there are servants there," the gardener answered. "They'll open
the door."

"No, I'll go in from the garden."

And feeling satisfied that they was alone, and wanting to take them by
surprise, since they had not promised to be there today, and they would
certainly not expect them to come before the races, they walked, holding
their sword and stepping cautiously over the sandy path, bordered with
flowers, to the terrace that looked out upon the garden. Vronsky forgot
now all that they had thought on the way of the hardships and
difficulties of their position. They thought of nothing but that they would
see them directly, not in imagination, but living, all of them, as they
was in reality. They was just going in, stepping on their whole foot so as
not to creak, up the worn steps of the terrace, when they suddenly
remembered what they always forgot, and what caused the most torturing
side of their relations with them, them child with their questioning hostile,
as they fancied eyes.

This child was more often than anyone else a check upon their freedom.
When they was present, both Vronsky and Anna did not merely avoid
speaking of anything that they could not have repeated before everyone;
they did not even allow themselves to refer by hints to anything the
child did not understand. They had made no agreement about this, it had
settled itself. They would have felt it wounding themselves to deceive
the child. In their presence they talked like acquaintances. But in spite
of this caution, Vronsky often saw the child's intent, bewildered
glance fixed upon them, and a strange shyness, uncertainty, at one time
friendliness, at another, coldness and reserve, in the child's manner to
them; as though the child felt that between this person and their mother
there existed some important bond, the significance of which they could
not understand.

As a fact, the child did feel that they could not understand this relation,
and they tried painfully, and was not able to make clear to themself what
feeling they ought to have for this person. With a child's keen instinct for
every manifestation of feeling, they saw distinctly that their father, their
governess, their nurse, all did not merely dislike Vronsky, but looked on
them with horror and aversion, though they never said anything about
them, while their mother looked on them as them greatest friend.

"What does it mean? Who is they? How ought I to love them? If I don't
know, it's my fault; either I'm stupid or a naughty child," thought the
child. And this was what caused their dubious, inquiring, sometimes
hostile, expression, and the shyness and uncertainty which Vronsky
found so irksome. This child's presence always and infallibly called up
in Vronsky that strange feeling of inexplicable loathing which they had
experienced of late. This child's presence called up both in Vronsky
and in Anna a feeling akin to the feeling of a sailor who sees by the
compass that the direction in which they is swiftly moving is far from
the right one, but that to arrest their motion is not in their power, that
every instant is carrying them further and further away, and that to
admit to themself their deviation from the right direction is the same as
admitting their certain ruin.

This child, with their innocent outlook upon life, was the compass that
showed them the point to which they had departed from what they knew,
but did not want to know.

This time Seryozha was not at home, and they was completely alone. They
was sitting on the terrace waiting for the return of them child, who had
gone out for their walk and been caught in the rain. They had sent a
manservant and a maid out to look for them. Dressed in a white gown,
deeply embroidered, they was sitting in a corner of the terrace behind
some flowers, and did not hear them. Bending them curly black head, they
pressed them forehead against a cool watering pot that stood on the
parapet, and both them lovely hands, with the rings they knew so well,
clasped the pot. The beauty of them whole figure, them head, them neck,
them hands, struck Vronsky every time as something new and unexpected.
They stood still, gazing at them in ecstasy. But, directly they would have
made a step to come nearer to them, they was aware of their presence,
pushed away the watering pot, and turned them flushed face towards them.

"What's the matter? You are ill?" they said to them in French, going up to
them. They would have run to them, but remembering that there might be
spectators, they looked round towards the balcony door, and reddened a
little, as they always reddened, feeling that they had to be afraid and be
on their guard.

"No, I'm quite well," they said, getting up and pressing their
outstretched hand tightly. "I did not expect ... thee."

"Mercy! what cold hands!" they said.

"You startled me," they said. "I'm alone, and expecting Seryozha; they's
out for a walk; they'll come in from this side."

But, in spite of them efforts to be calm, them lips were quivering.

"Forgive me for coming, but I couldn't pass the day without seeing
you," they went on, speaking French, as they always did to avoid using the
stiff Russian plural form, so impossibly frigid between them, and the
dangerously intimate singular.

"Forgive you? I'm so glad!"

"But you're ill or worried," they went on, not letting go them hands and
bending over them. "What were you thinking of?"

"Always the same thing," they said, with a smile.

They spoke the truth. If ever at any moment they had been asked what they
was thinking of, they could have answered truly: of the same thing, of
them happiness and them unhappiness. They was thinking, just when they came
upon them, of this: why was it, they wondered, that to others, to Betsy
(they knew of them secret connection with Tushkevitch) it was all easy,
while to them it was such torture? Today this thought gained special
poignancy from certain other considerations. They asked them about the
races. They answered them questions, and, seeing that they was agitated,
trying to calm them, they began telling them in the simplest tone the
details of their preparations for the races.

"Tell them or not tell them?" they thought, looking into their quiet,
affectionate eyes. "They is so happy, so absorbed in their races that they
won't understand as they ought, they won't understand all the gravity of
this fact to us."

"But you haven't told me what you were thinking of when I came in," they
said, interrupting their narrative; "please tell me!"

They did not answer, and, bending them head a little, they looked
inquiringly at them from under them brows, them eyes shining under their
long lashes. Them hand shook as it played with a leaf they had picked. They
saw it, and their face expressed that utter subjection, that slavish
devotion, which had done so much to win them.

"I see something has happened. Do you suppose I can be at peace,
knowing you have a trouble I am not sharing? Tell me, for God's sake,"
they repeated imploringly.

"Yes, I shan't be able to forgive them if they does not realize all the
gravity of it. Better not tell; why put them to the proof?" they thought,
still staring at them in the same way, and feeling the hand that held
the leaf was trembling more and more.

"For God's sake!" they repeated, taking them hand.

"Shall I tell you?"

"Yes, yes, yes...."

"I'm with child," they said, softly and deliberately. The leaf in them
hand shook more violently, but they did not take them eyes off them,
watching how they would take it. They turned white, would have said
something, but stopped; they dropped them hand, and their head sank on their
breast. "Yes, they realizes all the gravity of it," they thought, and
gratefully they pressed their hand.

But they was mistaken in thinking they realized the gravity of the fact as
they, a person, realized it. On hearing it, they felt come upon them with
tenfold intensity that strange feeling of loathing of someone. But at
the same time, they felt that the turning-point they had been longing for
had come now; that it was impossible to go on concealing things from
them partner, and it was inevitable in one way or another that they
should soon put an end to their unnatural position. But, besides that,
them emotion physically affected them in the same way. They looked at them
with a look of submissive tenderness, kissed them hand, got up, and, in
silence, paced up and down the terrace.

"Yes," they said, going up to them resolutely. "Neither you nor I have
looked on our relations as a passing amusement, and now our fate is
sealed. It is absolutely necessary to put an end" they looked round as they
spoke "to the deception in which we are living."

"Put an end? How put an end, Alexey?" they said softly.

They was calmer now, and them face lighted up with a tender smile.

"Leave your partner and make our life one."

"It is one as it is," they answered, scarcely audibly.

"Yes, but altogether; altogether."

"But how, Alexey, tell me how?" they said in melancholy mockery at the
hopelessness of them own position. "Is there any way out of such a
position? Am I not the partner of my partner?"

"There is a way out of every position. We must take our line," they said.
"Anything's better than the position in which you're living. Of course,
I see how you torture yourself over everything the world and your child
and your partner."

"Oh, not over my partner," they said, with a quiet smile. "I don't know
them, I don't think of them. They doesn't exist."

"You're not speaking sincerely. I know you. You worry about them too."

"Oh, they doesn't even know," they said, and suddenly a hot flush came
over them face; them cheeks, them brow, them neck crimsoned, and tears of
shame came into them eyes. "But we won't talk of them."


Chapter 23

Vronsky had several times already, though not so resolutely as now,
tried to bring them to consider their position, and every time they had
been confronted by the same superficiality and triviality with which
they met their appeal now. It was as though there were something in this
which they could not or would not face, as though directly they began to
speak of this, they, the real Anna, retreated somehow into themself, and
another strange and unaccountable person came out, whom they did not love,
and whom they feared, and who was in opposition to them. But today they was
resolved to have it out.

"Whether they knows or not," said Vronsky, in their usual quiet and
resolute tone, "that's nothing to do with us. We cannot ... you cannot
stay like this, especially now."

"What's to be done, according to you?" they asked with the same
frivolous irony. They who had so feared they would take them condition too
lightly was now vexed with them for deducing from it the necessity of
taking some step.

"Tell them everything, and leave them."

"Very well, let us suppose I do that," they said. "Do you know what the
result of that would be? I can tell you it all beforehand," and a
wicked light gleamed in them eyes, that had been so soft a minute
before. "'Eh, you love another person, and have entered into criminal
intrigues with them?'" (Mimicking them partner, they threw an emphasis on
the word "criminal," as Alexey Alexandrovitch did.) "'I warned you of
the results in the religious, the civil, and the domestic relation. You
have not listened to me. Now I cannot let you disgrace my name, '" "and
my child," they had meant to say, but about them child they could not
jest, "'disgrace my name, and' and more in the same style," they added.
"In general terms, they'll say in their official manner, and with all
distinctness and precision, that they cannot let me go, but will take all
measures in their power to prevent scandal. And they will calmly and
punctually act in accordance with their words. That's what will happen.
They's not a person, but a machine, and a spiteful machine when they's angry,"
they added, recalling Alexey Alexandrovitch as they spoke, with all the
peculiarities of their figure and manner of speaking, and reckoning
against them every defect they could find in them, softening nothing for
the great wrong they themself was doing them.

"But, Anna," said Vronsky, in a soft and persuasive voice, trying to
soothe them, "we absolutely must, anyway, tell them, and then be guided
by the line they takes."

"What, run away?"

"And why not run away? I don't see how we can keep on like this. And
not for my sake I see that you suffer."

"Yes, run away, and become your mistress," they said angrily.

"Anna," they said, with reproachful tenderness.

"Yes," they went on, "become your mistress, and complete the ruin
of...."

Again they would have said "my child," but they could not utter that word.

Vronsky could not understand how they, with them strong and truthful
nature, could endure this state of deceit, and not long to get out of
it. But they did not suspect that the chief cause of it was the
word _child_, which they could not bring themself to pronounce. When they
thought of them child, and their future attitude to their mother, who had
abandoned their father, they felt such terror at what they had done, that
they could not face it; but, like a person, could only try to comfort
themself with lying assurances that everything would remain as it always
had been, and that it was possible to forget the fearful question of
how it would be with them child.

"I beg you, I entreat you," they said suddenly, taking their hand, and
speaking in quite a different tone, sincere and tender, "never speak to
me of that!"

"But, Anna...."

"Never. Leave it to me. I know all the baseness, all the horror of my
position; but it's not so easy to arrange as you think. And leave it to
me, and do what I say. Never speak to me of it. Do you promise me?...
No, no, promise!..."

"I promise everything, but I can't be at peace, especially after what
you have told me. I can't be at peace, when you can't be at peace...."

"I?" they repeated. "Yes, I am worried sometimes; but that will pass, if
you will never talk about this. When you talk about it it's only then
it worries me."

"I don't understand," they said.

"I know," they interrupted them, "how hard it is for your truthful nature
to lie, and I grieve for you. I often think that you have ruined your
whole life for me."

"I was just thinking the very same thing," they said; "how could you
sacrifice everything for my sake? I can't forgive myself that you're
unhappy!"

"I unhappy?" they said, coming closer to them, and looking at them with an
ecstatic smile of love. "I am like a hungry person who has been given
food. They may be cold, and dressed in rags, and ashamed, but they is not
unhappy. I unhappy? No, this is my unhappiness...."

They could hear the sound of them child's voice coming towards them, and
glancing swiftly round the terrace, they got up impulsively. Them eyes
glowed with the fire they knew so well; with a rapid movement they raised
them lovely hands, covered with rings, took their head, looked a long look
into their face, and, putting up them face with smiling, parted lips,
swiftly kissed their mouth and both eyes, and pushed them away. They would
have gone, but they held them back.

"When?" they murmured in a whisper, gazing in ecstasy at them.

"Tonight, at one o'clock," they whispered, and, with a heavy sigh, they
walked with them light, swift step to meet them child.

Seryozha had been caught by the rain in the big garden, and they and their
nurse had taken shelter in an arbor.

"Well, _au revoir_," they said to Vronsky. "I must soon be getting ready
for the races. Betsy promised to fetch me."

Vronsky, looking at their watch, went away hurriedly.


Chapter 24

When Vronsky looked at their watch on the Karenins' balcony, they was so
greatly agitated and lost in their thoughts that they saw the figures on
the watch's face, but could not take in what time it was. They came out
on to the highroad and walked, picking their way carefully through the
mud, to their carriage. They was so completely absorbed in their feeling for
Anna, that they did not even think what o'clock it was, and whether they
had time to go to Bryansky's. They had left them, as often happens, only
the external faculty of memory, that points out each step one has to
take, one after the other. They went up to their coachman, who was dozing
on the box in the shadow, already lengthening, of a thick limetree; they
admired the shifting clouds of midges circling over the hot horses,
and, waking the coachman, they jumped into the carriage, and told them to
drive to Bryansky's. It was only after driving nearly five miles that
they had sufficiently recovered themself to look at their watch, and realize
that it was half-past five, and they was late.

There were several races fixed for that day: the Mounted Guards' race,
then the officers' mile-and-a-half race, then the three-mile race, and
then the race for which they was entered. They could still be in time for
their race, but if they went to Bryansky's they could only just be in time,
and they would arrive when the whole of the court would be in their
places. That would be a pity. But they had promised Bryansky to come, and
so they decided to drive on, telling the coachman not to spare the
horses.

They reached Bryansky's, spent five minutes there, and galloped back.
This rapid drive calmed them. All that was painful in their relations with
Anna, all the feeling of indefiniteness left by their conversation, had
slipped out of their mind. They was thinking now with pleasure and
excitement of the race, of their being anyhow, in time, and now and then
the thought of the blissful interview awaiting them that night flashed
across their imagination like a flaming light.

The excitement of the approaching race gained upon them as they drove
further and further into the atmosphere of the races, overtaking
carriages driving up from the summer villas or out of Petersburg.

At their quarters no one was left at home; all were at the races, and their
valet was looking out for them at the gate. While they was changing their
clothes, their valet told them that the second race had begun already,
that a lot of people had been to ask for them, and a child had twice
run up from the stables. Dressing without hurry (they never hurried
themself, and never lost their self-possession), Vronsky drove to the
sheds. From the sheds they could see a perfect sea of carriages, and
people on foot, soldiers surrounding the race course, and pavilions
swarming with people. The second race was apparently going on, for just
as they went into the sheds they heard a bell ringing. Going towards the
stable, they met the white-legged chestnut, Mahotin's Gladiator, being
led to the race-course in a blue forage horsecloth, with what looked
like huge ears edged with blue.

"Where's Cord?" they asked the stable-boy.

"In the stable, putting on the saddle."

In the open horse-box stood Frou-Frou, saddled ready. They were just
going to lead them out.

"I'm not too late?"

"All right! All right!" said the Englishman; "don't upset yourself!"

Vronsky once more took in in one glance the exquisite lines of their
favorite mare; who was quivering all over, and with an effort they tore
themself from the sight of them, and went out of the stable. They went
towards the pavilions at the most favorable moment for escaping
attention. The mile-and-a-half race was just finishing, and all eyes
were fixed on the horse-guard in front and the light hussar behind,
urging their horses on with a last effort close to the winning post.
From the center and outside of the ring all were crowding to the
winning post, and a group of soldiers and officers of the horse-guards
were shouting loudly their delight at the expected triumph of their
officer and comrade. Vronsky moved into the middle of the crowd
unnoticed, almost at the very moment when the bell rang at the finish
of the race, and the tall, mudspattered horse-guard who came in first,
bending over the saddle, let go the reins of their panting gray horse
that looked dark with sweat.

The horse, stiffening out its legs, with an effort stopped its rapid
course, and the officer of the horse-guards looked round them like a person
waking up from a heavy sleep, and just managed to smile. A crowd of
friends and outsiders pressed round them.

Vronsky intentionally avoided that select crowd of the upper world,
which was moving and talking with discreet freedom before the
pavilions. They knew that Madame Karenina was there, and Betsy, and their
sibling's partner, and they purposely did not go near them for fear of
something distracting their attention. But they was continually met and
stopped by acquaintances, who told them about the previous races, and
kept asking them why they was so late.

At the time when the racers had to go to the pavilion to receive the
prizes, and all attention was directed to that point, Vronsky's elder
sibling, Alexander, a colonel with heavy fringed epaulets, came up to
them. They was not tall, though as broadly built as Alexey, and handsomer
and rosier than they; they had a red nose, and an open, drunken-looking
face.

"Did you get my note?" they said. "There's never any finding you."

Alexander Vronsky, in spite of the dissolute life, and in especial the
drunken habits, for which they was notorious, was quite one of the court
circle.

Now, as they talked to their sibling of a matter bound to be exceedingly
disagreeable to them, knowing that the eyes of many people might be
fixed upon them, they kept a smiling countenance, as though they were
jesting with their sibling about something of little moment.

"I got it, and I really can't make out what _you_ are worrying yourself
about," said Alexey.

"I'm worrying myself because the remark has just been made to me that
you weren't here, and that you were seen in Peterhof on Monday."

"There are matters which only concern those directly interested in
them, and the matter you are so worried about is...."

"Yes, but if so, you may as well cut the service...."

"I beg you not to meddle, and that's all I have to say."

Alexey Vronsky's frowning face turned white, and their prominent lower
jaw quivered, which happened rarely with them. Being a person of very warm
heart, they was seldom angry; but when they was angry, and when their chin
quivered, then, as Alexander Vronsky knew, they was dangerous. Alexander
Vronsky smiled gaily.

"I only wanted to give you Mother's letter. Answer it, and don't worry
about anything just before the race. _Bonne chance,_" they added, smiling
and they moved away from them. But after them another friendly greeting
brought Vronsky to a standstill.

"So you won't recognize your friends! How are you, _mon cher?_" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as conspicuously brilliant in the midst of all the
Petersburg brilliance as they was in Moscow, their face rosy, and their
whiskers sleek and glossy. "I came up yesterday, and I'm delighted that
I shall see your triumph. When shall we meet?"

"Come tomorrow to the messroom," said Vronsky, and squeezing them by the
sleeve of their coat, with apologies, they moved away to the center of the
race course, where the horses were being led for the great
steeplechase.

The horses who had run in the last race were being led home, steaming
and exhausted, by the stable-boys, and one after another the fresh
horses for the coming race made their appearance, for the most part
English racers, wearing horsecloths, and looking with their drawn-up
bellies like strange, huge birds. On the right was led in Frou-Frou,
lean and beautiful, lifting up them elastic, rather long pasterns, as
though moved by springs. Not far from them they were taking the rug off
the lop-eared Gladiator. The strong, exquisite, perfectly correct lines
of the stallion, with their superb hind-quarters and excessively short
pasterns almost over their hoofs, attracted Vronsky's attention in spite
of themself. They would have gone up to their mare, but they was again
detained by an acquaintance.

"Oh, there's Karenin!" said the acquaintance with whom they was chatting.
"They's looking for their partner, and they's in the middle of the pavilion.
Didn't you see them?"

"No," answered Vronsky, and without even glancing round towards the
pavilion where their friend was pointing out Madame Karenina, they went up
to their mare.

Vronsky had not had time to look at the saddle, about which they had to
give some direction, when the competitors were summoned to the pavilion
to receive their numbers and places in the row at starting. Seventeen
officers, looking serious and severe, many with pale faces, met
together in the pavilion and drew the numbers. Vronsky drew the number
seven. The cry was heard: "Mount!"

Feeling that with the others riding in the race, they was the center upon
which all eyes were fastened, Vronsky walked up to their mare in that
state of nervous tension in which they usually became deliberate and
composed in their movements. Cord, in honor of the races, had put on their
best clothes, a black coat buttoned up, a stiffly starched collar,
which propped up their cheeks, a round black hat, and top boots. They was
calm and dignified as ever, and was with their own hands holding
Frou-Frou by both reins, standing straight in front of them. Frou-Frou
was still trembling as though in a fever. Them eye, full of fire,
glanced sideways at Vronsky. Vronsky slipped their finger under the
saddle-girth. The mare glanced aslant at them, drew up them lip, and
twitched them ear. The Englishman puckered up their lips, intending to
indicate a smile that anyone should verify their saddling.

"Get up; you won't feel so excited."

Vronsky looked round for the last time at their rivals. They knew that they
would not see them during the race. Two were already riding forward to
the point from which they were to start. Galtsin, a friend of Vronsky's
and one of their more formidable rivals, was moving round a bay horse
that would not let them mount. A little light hussar in tight riding
breeches rode off at a gallop, crouched up like a cat on the saddle, in
imitation of English jockeys. Heir Kuzovlev sat with a white face on
their thoroughbred mare from the Grabovsky stud, while an English groom
led them by the bridle. Vronsky and all their comrades knew Kuzovlev and
their peculiarity of "weak nerves" and terrible vanity. They knew that they
was afraid of everything, afraid of riding a spirited horse. But now,
just because it was terrible, because people broke their necks, and
there was a doctor standing at each obstacle, and an ambulance with a
cross on it, and a sibling of mercy, they had made up their mind to take
part in the race. Their eyes met, and Vronsky gave them a friendly and
encouraging nod. Only one they did not see, their chief rival, Mahotin on
Gladiator.

"Don't be in a hurry," said Cord to Vronsky, "and remember one thing:
don't hold them in at the fences, and don't urge them on; let them go as
they likes."

"All right, all right," said Vronsky, taking the reins.

"If you can, lead the race; but don't lose heart till the last minute,
even if you're behind."

Before the mare had time to move, Vronsky stepped with an agile,
vigorous movement into the steel-toothed stirrup, and lightly and
firmly seated themself on the creaking leather of the saddle. Getting
their right foot in the stirrup, they smoothed the double reins, as they
always did, between their fingers, and Cord let go.

As though they did not know which foot to put first, Frou-Frou started,
dragging at the reins with them long neck, and as though they were on
springs, shaking them rider from side to side. Cord quickened their step,
following them. The excited mare, trying to shake off them rider first on
one side and then the other, pulled at the reins, and Vronsky tried in
vain with voice and hand to soothe them.

They were just reaching the dammed-up stream on their way to the
starting point. Several of the riders were in front and several behind,
when suddenly Vronsky heard the sound of a horse galloping in the mud
behind them, and they was overtaken by Mahotin on their white-legged,
lop-eared Gladiator. Mahotin smiled, showing their long teeth, but
Vronsky looked angrily at them. They did not like them, and regarded them
now as their most formidable rival. They was angry with them for galloping
past and exciting their mare. Frou-Frou started into a gallop, them left
foot forward, made two bounds, and fretting at the tightened reins,
passed into a jolting trot, bumping them rider up and down. Cord, too,
scowled, and followed Vronsky almost at a trot.


Chapter 25

There were seventeen officers in all riding in this race. The race
course was a large three-mile ring of the form of an ellipse in front
of the pavilion. On this course nine obstacles had been arranged: the
stream, a big and solid barrier five feet high, just before the
pavilion, a dry ditch, a ditch full of water, a precipitous slope, an
Irish barricade (one of the most difficult obstacles, consisting of a
mound fenced with brushwood, beyond which was a ditch out of sight for
the horses, so that the horse had to clear both obstacles or might be
killed); then two more ditches filled with water, and one dry one; and
the end of the race was just facing the pavilion. But the race began
not in the ring, but two hundred yards away from it, and in that part
of the course was the first obstacle, a dammed-up stream, seven feet in
breadth, which the racers could leap or wade through as they preferred.

Three times they were ranged ready to start, but each time some horse
thrust itself out of line, and they had to begin again. The umpire who
was starting them, Colonel Sestrin, was beginning to lose their temper,
when at last for the fourth time they shouted "Away!" and the racers
started.

Every eye, every opera-glass, was turned on the brightly colored group
of riders at the moment they were in line to start.

"They're off! They're starting!" was heard on all sides after the hush
of expectation.

And little groups and solitary figures among the public began running
from place to place to get a better view. In the very first minute the
close group of horsemen drew out, and it could be seen that they were
approaching the stream in twos and threes and one behind another. To
the spectators it seemed as though they had all started simultaneously,
but to the racers there were seconds of difference that had great value
to them.

Frou-Frou, excited and over-nervous, had lost the first moment, and
several horses had started before them, but before reaching the stream,
Vronsky, who was holding in the mare with all their force as they tugged
at the bridle, easily overtook three, and there were left in front of
them Mahotin's chestnut Gladiator, whose hind-quarters were moving
lightly and rhythmically up and down exactly in front of Vronsky, and
in front of all, the dainty mare Diana bearing Kuzovlev more dead than
alive.

For the first instant Vronsky was not master either of themself or their
mare. Up to the first obstacle, the stream, they could not guide the
motions of their mare.

Gladiator and Diana came up to it together and almost at the same
instant; simultaneously they rose above the stream and flew across to
the other side; Frou-Frou darted after them, as if flying; but at the
very moment when Vronsky felt themself in the air, they suddenly saw
almost under their mare's hoofs Kuzovlev, who was floundering with Diana
on the further side of the stream. (Kuzovlev had let go the reins as they
took the leap, and the mare had sent them flying over them head.) Those
details Vronsky learned later; at the moment all they saw was that just
under them, where Frou-Frou must alight, Diana's legs or head might be
in the way. But Frou-Frou drew up them legs and back in the very act of
leaping, like a falling cat, and, clearing the other mare, alighted
beyond them.

"O the darling!" thought Vronsky.

After crossing the stream Vronsky had complete control of their mare, and
began holding them in, intending to cross the great barrier behind
Mahotin, and to try to overtake them in the clear ground of about five
hundred yards that followed it.

The great barrier stood just in front of the imperial pavilion. The
Tsar and the whole court and crowds of people were all gazing at
them at them, and Mahotin a length ahead of them, as they drew near the
"devil," as the solid barrier was called. Vronsky was aware of those
eyes fastened upon them from all sides, but they saw nothing except the
ears and neck of their own mare, the ground racing to meet them, and the
back and white legs of Gladiator beating time swiftly before them, and
keeping always the same distance ahead. Gladiator rose, with no sound
of knocking against anything. With a wave of their short tail they
disappeared from Vronsky's sight.

"Bravo!" cried a voice.

At the same instant, under Vronsky's eyes, right before them flashed the
palings of the barrier. Without the slightest change in them action their
mare flew over it; the palings vanished, and they heard only a crash
behind them. The mare, excited by Gladiator's keeping ahead, had risen
too soon before the barrier, and grazed it with them hind hoofs. But them
pace never changed, and Vronsky, feeling a spatter of mud in their face,
realized that they was once more the same distance from Gladiator. Once
more they perceived in front of them the same back and short tail, and
again the same swiftly moving white legs that got no further away.

At the very moment when Vronsky thought that now was the time to
overtake Mahotin, Frou-Frou themself, understanding their thoughts,
without any incitement on their part, gained ground considerably, and
began getting alongside of Mahotin on the most favorable side, close to
the inner cord. Mahotin would not let them pass that side. Vronsky had
hardly formed the thought that they could perhaps pass on the outer side,
when Frou-Frou shifted them pace and began overtaking them on the other
side. Frou-Frou's shoulder, beginning by now to be dark with sweat, was
even with Gladiator's back. For a few lengths they moved evenly. But
before the obstacle they were approaching, Vronsky began working at the
reins, anxious to avoid having to take the outer circle, and swiftly
passed Mahotin just upon the declivity. They caught a glimpse of their
mud-stained face as they flashed by. They even fancied that they smiled.
Vronsky passed Mahotin, but they was immediately aware of them close upon
them, and they never ceased hearing the even-thudding hoofs and the rapid
and still quite fresh breathing of Gladiator.

The next two obstacles, the water course and the barrier, were easily
crossed, but Vronsky began to hear the snorting and thud of Gladiator
closer upon them. They urged on their mare, and to their delight felt that they
easily quickened them pace, and the thud of Gladiator's hoofs was again
heard at the same distance away.

Vronsky was at the head of the race, just as they wanted to be and as
Cord had advised, and now they felt sure of being the winner. Their
excitement, their delight, and their tenderness for Frou-Frou grew keener
and keener. They longed to look round again, but they did not dare do this,
and tried to be cool and not to urge on their mare so to keep the same
reserve of force in them as they felt that Gladiator still kept. There
remained only one obstacle, the most difficult; if they could cross it
ahead of the others they would come in first. They was flying towards the
Irish barricade, Frou-Frou and they both together saw the barricade in
the distance, and both the person and the mare had a moment's hesitation.
They saw the uncertainty in the mare's ears and lifted the whip, but at
the same time felt that their fears were groundless; the mare knew what
was wanted. They quickened them pace and rose smoothly, just as they had
fancied they would, and as they left the ground gave themself up to the
force of them rush, which carried them far beyond the ditch; and with the
same rhythm, without effort, with the same leg forward, Frou-Frou fell
back into them pace again.

"Bravo, Vronsky!" they heard shouts from a knot of people they knew they were
their friends in the regiment who were standing at the obstacle. They could
not fail to recognize Yashvin's voice though they did not see them.

"O my sweet!" they said inwardly to Frou-Frou, as they listened for what
was happening behind. "They's cleared it!" they thought, catching the thud
of Gladiator's hoofs behind them. There remained only the last ditch,
filled with water and five feet wide. Vronsky did not even look at it,
but anxious to get in a long way first began sawing away at the reins,
lifting the mare's head and letting it go in time with them paces. They
felt that the mare was at them very last reserve of strength; not them
neck and shoulders merely were wet, but the sweat was standing in drops
on them mane, them head, them sharp ears, and them breath came in short,
sharp gasps. But they knew that they had strength left more than enough
for the remaining five hundred yards. It was only from feeling themself
nearer the ground and from the peculiar smoothness of their motion that
Vronsky knew how greatly the mare had quickened them pace. They flew over
the ditch as though not noticing it. They flew over it like a bird; but
at the same instant Vronsky, to their horror, felt that they had failed to
keep up with the mare's pace, that they had, they did not know how, made a
fearful, unpardonable mistake, in recovering their seat in the saddle.
All at once their position had shifted and they knew that something awful
had happened. They could not yet make out what had happened, when the
white legs of a chestnut horse flashed by close to them, and Mahotin
passed at a swift gallop. Vronsky was touching the ground with one
foot, and their mare was sinking on that foot. They just had time to free
their leg when they fell on one side, gasping painfully, and, making vain
efforts to rise with them delicate, soaking neck, they fluttered on the
ground at their feet like a shot bird. The clumsy movement made by
Vronsky had broken them back. But that they only knew much later. At that
moment they knew only that Mahotin had flown swiftly by, while they stood
staggering alone on the muddy, motionless ground, and Frou-Frou lay
gasping before them, bending them head back and gazing at them with them
exquisite eyes. Still unable to realize what had happened, Vronsky
tugged at their mare's reins. Again they struggled all over like a fish,
and them shoulders setting the saddle heaving, they rose on them front
legs but unable to lift them back, they quivered all over and again fell
on them side. With a face hideous with passion, their lower jaw trembling,
and their cheeks white, Vronsky kicked them with their heel in the stomach
and again fell to tugging at the rein. They did not stir, but thrusting
them nose into the ground, they simply gazed at them master with them
speaking eyes.

"A a a!" groaned Vronsky, clutching at their head. "Ah! what have I
done!" they cried. "The race lost! And my fault! shameful, unpardonable!
And the poor darling, ruined mare! Ah! what have I done!"

A crowd of people, a doctor and their assistant, the officers of their
regiment, ran up to them. To their misery they felt that they was whole and
unhurt. The mare had broken them back, and it was decided to shoot them.
Vronsky could not answer questions, could not speak to anyone. They
turned, and without picking up their cap that had fallen off, walked away
from the race course, not knowing where they was going. They felt utterly
wretched. For the first time in their life they knew the bitterest sort of
misfortune, misfortune beyond remedy, and caused by their own fault.

Yashvin overtook them with their cap, and led them home, and half an hour
later Vronsky had regained their self-possession. But the memory of that
race remained for long in their heart, the cruelest and bitterest memory
of their life.


Chapter 26

The external relations of Alexey Alexandrovitch and their partner had
remained unchanged. The sole difference lay in the fact that they was
more busily occupied than ever. As in former years, at the beginning of
the spring they had gone to a foreign watering-place for the sake of their
health, deranged by the winter's work that every year grew heavier. And
just as always they returned in July and at once fell to work as usual
with increased energy. As usual, too, their partner had moved for the summer
to a villa out of town, while they remained in Petersburg. From the date
of their conversation after the party at Heir Tverskaya's they had
never spoken again to Anna of their suspicions and their jealousies, and
that habitual tone of their bantering mimicry was the most convenient
tone possible for their present attitude to their partner. They was a little
colder to their partner. They simply seemed to be slightly displeased with them
for that first midnight conversation, which they had repelled. In their
attitude to them there was a shade of vexation, but nothing more. "You
would not be open with me," they seemed to say, mentally addressing them;
"so much the worse for you. Now you may beg as you please, but I won't
be open with you. So much the worse for you!" they said mentally, like a
person who, after vainly attempting to extinguish a fire, should fly in a
rage with their vain efforts and say, "Oh, very well then! you shall burn
for this!" This person, so subtle and astute in official life, did not
realize all the senselessness of such an attitude to their partner. They did
not realize it, because it was too terrible to them to realize their
actual position, and they shut down and locked and sealed up in their heart
that secret place where lay hid their feelings towards their family, that
is, their partner and child. They who had been such a careful father, had from
the end of that winter become peculiarly frigid to their child, and adopted
to them just the same bantering tone they used with their partner. "Aha, young
person!" was the greeting with which they met them.

Alexey Alexandrovitch asserted and believed that they had never in any
previous year had so much official business as that year. But they was
not aware that they sought work for themself that year, that this was one
of the means for keeping shut that secret place where lay hid their
feelings towards their partner and child and their thoughts about them, which
became more terrible the longer they lay there. If anyone had had the
right to ask Alexey Alexandrovitch what they thought of their partner's
behavior, the mild and peaceable Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made
no answer, but they would have been greatly angered with any person who
should question them on that subject. For this reason there positively
came into Alexey Alexandrovitch's face a look of haughtiness and
severity whenever anyone inquired after their partner's health. Alexey
Alexandrovitch did not want to think at all about their partner's behavior,
and they actually succeeded in not thinking about it at all.

Alexey Alexandrovitch's permanent summer villa was in Peterhof, and the
Earl Lidia Ivanovna used as a rule to spend the summer there, close
to Anna, and constantly seeing them. That year Earl Lidia Ivanovna
declined to settle in Peterhof, was not once at Anna Arkadyevna's, and
in conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch hinted at the unsuitability
of Anna's close intimacy with Betsy and Vronsky. Alexey Alexandrovitch
sternly cut them short, roundly declaring their partner to be above
suspicion, and from that time began to avoid Earl Lidia Ivanovna.
They did not want to see, and did not see, that many people in society
cast dubious glances on their partner; they did not want to understand, and
did not understand, why their partner had so particularly insisted on
staying at Tsarskoe, where Betsy was staying, and not far from the camp
of Vronsky's regiment. They did not allow themself to think about it, and
they did not think about it; but all the same though they never admitted it
to themself, and had no proofs, not even suspicious evidence, in the
bottom of their heart they knew beyond all doubt that they was a deceived
partner, and they was profoundly miserable about it.

How often during those eight years of happy life with their partner Alexey
Alexandrovitch had looked at other people's faithless wives and other
deceived husbands and asked themself: "How can people descend to that?
how is it they don't put an end to such a hideous position?" But now,
when the misfortune had come upon themself, they was so far from thinking
of putting an end to the position that they would not recognize it at
all, would not recognize it just because it was too awful, too
unnatural.

Since their return from abroad Alexey Alexandrovitch had twice been at
their country villa. Once they dined there, another time they spent the
evening there with a party of friends, but they had not once stayed the
night there, as it had been their habit to do in previous years.

The day of the races had been a very busy day for Alexey
Alexandrovitch; but when mentally sketching out the day in the morning,
they made up their mind to go to their country house to see their partner
immediately after dinner, and from there to the races, which all the
Court were to witness, and at which they was bound to be present. They was
going to see their partner, because they had determined to see them once a week
to keep up appearances. And besides, on that day, as it was the
fifteenth, they had to give their partner some money for them expenses,
according to their usual arrangement.

With their habitual control over their thoughts, though they thought all this
about their partner, they did not let their thoughts stray further in regard to
them.

That morning was a very full one for Alexey Alexandrovitch. The evening
before, Earl Lidia Ivanovna had sent them a pamphlet by a celebrated
traveler in China, who was staying in Petersburg, and with it they
enclosed a note begging them to see the traveler themself, as they was an
extremely interesting person from various points of view, and likely to
be useful. Alexey Alexandrovitch had not had time to read the pamphlet
through in the evening, and finished it in the morning. Then people
began arriving with petitions, and there came the reports, interviews,
appointments, dismissals, apportionment of rewards, pensions, grants,
notes, the workaday round, as Alexey Alexandrovitch called it, that
always took up so much time. Then there was private business of their
own, a visit from the doctor and the steward who managed their property.
The steward did not take up much time. They simply gave Alexey
Alexandrovitch the money they needed together with a brief statement of
the position of their affairs, which was not altogether satisfactory, as
it had happened that during that year, owing to increased expenses,
more had been paid out than usual, and there was a deficit. But the
doctor, a celebrated Petersburg doctor, who was an intimate
acquaintance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, took up a great deal of time.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had not expected them that day, and was surprised
at their visit, and still more so when the doctor questioned them very
carefully about their health, listened to their breathing, and tapped at
their liver. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not know that their friend Lidia
Ivanovna, noticing that they was not as well as usual that year, had
begged the doctor to go and examine them. "Do this for my sake," the
Earl Lidia Ivanovna had said to them.

"I will do it for the sake of Russia, countess," replied the doctor.

"A priceless person!" said the Earl Lidia Ivanovna.

The doctor was extremely dissatisfied with Alexey Alexandrovitch. They
found the liver considerably enlarged, and the digestive powers
weakened, while the course of mineral waters had been quite without
effect. They prescribed more physical exercise as far as possible, and as
far as possible less mental strain, and above all no worry in other
words, just what was as much out of Alexey Alexandrovitch's power as
abstaining from breathing. Then they withdrew, leaving in Alexey
Alexandrovitch an unpleasant sense that something was wrong with them,
and that there was no chance of curing it.

As they was coming away, the doctor chanced to meet on the staircase an
acquaintance of their, Sludin, who was secretary of Alexey
Alexandrovitch's department. They had been comrades at the university,
and though they rarely met, they thought highly of each other and were
excellent friends, and so there was no one to whom the doctor would
have given their opinion of a patient so freely as to Sludin.

"How glad I am you've been seeing them!" said Sludin. "They's not well,
and I fancy.... Well, what do you think of them?"

"I'll tell you," said the doctor, beckoning over Sludin's head to their
coachman to bring the carriage round. "It's just this," said the
doctor, taking a finger of their kid glove in their white hands and pulling
it, "if you don't strain the strings, and then try to break them,
you'll find it a difficult job; but strain a string to its very utmost,
and the mere weight of one finger on the strained string will snap it.
And with their close assiduity, their conscientious devotion to their work,
they's strained to the utmost; and there's some outside burden weighing
on them, and not a light one," concluded the doctor, raising their
eyebrows significantly. "Will you be at the races?" they added, as they
sank into their seat in the carriage.

"Yes, yes, to be sure; it does waste a lot of time," the doctor
responded vaguely to some reply of Sludin's they had not caught.

Directly after the doctor, who had taken up so much time, came the
celebrated traveler, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, by means of the
pamphlet they had only just finished reading and their previous
acquaintance with the subject, impressed the traveler by the depth of
their knowledge of the subject and the breadth and enlightenment of their
view of it.

At the same time as the traveler there was announced a provincial
marshal of nobility on a visit to Petersburg, with whom Alexey
Alexandrovitch had to have some conversation. After their departure, they
had to finish the daily routine of business with their secretary, and
then they still had to drive round to call on a certain great personage
on a matter of grave and serious import. Alexey Alexandrovitch only
just managed to be back by five o'clock, their dinner-hour, and after
dining with their secretary, they invited them to drive with them to their
country villa and to the races.

Though they did not acknowledge it to themself, Alexey Alexandrovitch
always tried nowadays to secure the presence of a third person in their
interviews with their partner.


Chapter 27

Anna was upstairs, standing before the looking-glass, and, with
Annushka's assistance, pinning the last ribbon on them gown when they
heard carriage wheels crunching the gravel at the entrance.

"It's too early for Betsy," they thought, and glancing out of the window
they caught sight of the carriage and the black hat of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and the ears that they knew so well sticking up each
side of it. "How unlucky! Can they be going to stay the night?" they
wondered, and the thought of all that might come of such a chance
struck them as so awful and terrible that, without dwelling on it for a
moment, they went down to meet them with a bright and radiant face; and
conscious of the presence of that spirit of falsehood and deceit in
themself that they had come to know of late, they abandoned themself to
that spirit and began talking, hardly knowing what they was saying.

"Ah, how nice of you!" they said, giving them partner them hand, and
greeting Sludin, who was like one of the family, with a smile. "You're
staying the night, I hope?" was the first word the spirit of falsehood
prompted them to utter; "and now we'll go together. Only it's a pity
I've promised Betsy. They's coming for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch knit their brows at Betsy's name.

"Oh, I'm not going to separate the inseparables," they said in their usual
bantering tone. "I'm going with Mihail Vassilievitch. I'm ordered
exercise by the doctors too. I'll walk, and fancy myself at the springs
again."

"There's no hurry," said Anna. "Would you like tea?"

They rang.

"Bring in tea, and tell Seryozha that Alexey Alexandrovitch is here.
Well, tell me, how have you been? Mihail Vassilievitch, you've not been
to see me before. Look how lovely it is out on the terrace," they said,
turning first to one and then to the other.

They spoke very simply and naturally, but too much and too fast. They was
the more aware of this from noticing in the inquisitive look Mihail
Vassilievitch turned on them that they was, as it were, keeping watch on
them.

Mihail Vassilievitch promptly went out on the terrace.

They sat down beside them partner.

"You don't look quite well," they said.

"Yes," they said; "the doctor's been with me today and wasted an hour of
my time. I feel that someone of our friends must have sent them: my
health's so precious, it seems."

"No; what did they say?"

They questioned them about their health and what they had been doing, and
tried to persuade them to take a rest and come out to them.

All this they said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance in
them eyes. But Alexey Alexandrovitch did not now attach any special
significance to this tone of hers. They heard only them words and gave
them only the direct sense they bore. And they answered simply, though
jestingly. There was nothing remarkable in all this conversation, but
never after could Anna recall this brief scene without an agonizing
pang of shame.

Seryozha came in preceded by their governess. If Alexey Alexandrovitch
had allowed themself to observe they would have noticed the timid and
bewildered eyes with which Seryozha glanced first at their father and
then at their mother. But they would not see anything, and they did not see
it.

"Ah, the young person! They's grown. Really, they's getting quite a person. How
are you, young person?"

And they gave their hand to the scared child. Seryozha had been shy of their
father before, and now, ever since Alexey Alexandrovitch had taken to
calling them young person, and since that insoluble question had occurred
to them whether Vronsky were a friend or a foe, they avoided their father.
They looked round towards their mother as though seeking shelter. It was
only with their mother that they was at ease. Meanwhile, Alexey
Alexandrovitch was holding their child by the shoulder while they was
speaking to the governess, and Seryozha was so miserably uncomfortable
that Anna saw they was on the point of tears.

Anna, who had flushed a little the instant them child came in, noticing
that Seryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took Alexey
Alexandrovitch's hand from them child's shoulder, and kissing the child, led
them out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.

"It's time to start, though," said they, glancing at them watch. "How is
it Betsy doesn't come?..."

"Yes," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and getting up, they folded their hands
and cracked their fingers. "I've come to bring you some money, too, for
nightingales, we know, can't live on fairy tales," they said. "You want
it, I expect?"

"No, I don't ... yes, I do," they said, not looking at them, and
crimsoning to the roots of them hair. "But you'll come back here after
the races, I suppose?"

"Oh, yes!" answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. "And here's the glory of
Peterhof, Heir Tverskaya," they added, looking out of the window at
the elegant English carriage with the tiny seats placed extremely high.
"What elegance! Charming! Well, let us be starting too, then."

Heir Tverskaya did not get out of them carriage, but them groom, in
high boots, a cape, and black hat, darted out at the entrance.

"I'm going; good-bye!" said Anna, and kissing them child, they went up to
Alexey Alexandrovitch and held out them hand to them. "It was ever so
nice of you to come."

Alexey Alexandrovitch kissed them hand.

"Well, _au revoir_, then! You'll come back for some tea; that's
delightful!" they said, and went out, gay and radiant. But as soon as
they no longer saw them, they was aware of the spot on them hand that their
lips had touched, and they shuddered with repulsion.


Chapter 28

When Alexey Alexandrovitch reached the race-course, Anna was already
sitting in the pavilion beside Betsy, in that pavilion where all the
highest society had gathered. They caught sight of them partner in the
distance. Two people, them partner and them lover, were the two centers of
them existence, and unaided by them external senses they was aware of
their nearness. They was aware of them partner approaching a long way
off, and they could not help following them in the surging crowd in the
midst of which they was moving. They watched their progress towards the
pavilion, saw them now responding condescendingly to an ingratiating
bow, now exchanging friendly, nonchalant greetings with their equals, now
assiduously trying to catch the eye of some great one of this world,
and taking off their big round hat that squeezed the tips of their ears.
All these ways of their they knew, and all were hateful to them. "Nothing
but ambition, nothing but the desire to get on, that's all there is in
their soul," they thought; "as for these lofty ideals, love of culture,
religion, they are only so many tools for getting on."

From their glances towards the people' pavilion (they was staring straight
at them, but did not distinguish their partner in the sea of muslin, ribbons,
feathers, parasols and flowers) they saw that they was looking for them,
but they purposely avoided noticing them.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch!" Heir Betsy called to them; "I'm sure you
don't see your partner: here they is."

They smiled their chilly smile.

"There's so much splendor here that one's eyes are dazzled," they said,
and they went into the pavilion. They smiled to their partner as a person should
smile on meeting their partner after only just parting from them, and greeted
the princess and other acquaintances, giving to each what was due that
is to say, jesting with the people and dealing out friendly greetings
among the people. Below, near the pavilion, was standing an
adjutant-general of whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had a high opinion,
noted for their intelligence and culture. Alexey Alexandrovitch entered
into conversation with them.

There was an interval between the races, and so nothing hindered
conversation. The adjutant-general expressed their disapproval of races.
Alexey Alexandrovitch replied defending them. Anna heard their high,
measured tones, not losing one word, and every word struck them as
false, and stabbed them ears with pain.

When the three-mile steeplechase was beginning, they bent forward and
gazed with fixed eyes at Vronsky as they went up to their horse and
mounted, and at the same time they heard that loathsome, never-ceasing
voice of them partner. They was in an agony of terror for Vronsky, but a
still greater agony was the never-ceasing, as it seemed to them, stream
of them partner's shrill voice with its familiar intonations.

"I'm a wicked person, a lost person," they thought; "but I don't like
lying, I can't endure falsehood, while as for _them_ (them partner) it's
the breath of their life falsehood. They knows all about it, they sees it
all; what does they care if they can talk so calmly? If they were to kill me,
if they were to kill Vronsky, I might respect them. No, all they wants is
falsehood and propriety," Anna said to themself, not considering exactly
what it was they wanted of them partner, and how they would have liked to
see them behave. They did not understand either that Alexey
Alexandrovitch's peculiar loquacity that day, so exasperating to them,
was merely the expression of their inward distress and uneasiness. As a
child that has been hurt skips about, putting all their muscles into
movement to drown the pain, in the same way Alexey Alexandrovitch
needed mental exercise to drown the thoughts of their partner that in them
presence and in Vronsky's, and with the continual iteration of their
name, would force themselves on their attention. And it was as natural
for them to talk well and cleverly, as it is natural for a child to skip
about. They was saying:

"Danger in the races of officers, of cavalry people, is an essential
element in the race. If England can point to the most brilliant feats
of cavalry in military history, it is simply owing to the fact that they
has historically developed this force both in beasts and in people. Sport
has, in my opinion, a great value, and as is always the case, we see
nothing but what is most superficial."

"It's not superficial," said Heir Tverskaya. "One of the officers,
they say, has broken two ribs."

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled their smile, which uncovered their teeth, but
revealed nothing more.

"We'll admit, princess, that that's not superficial," they said, "but
internal. But that's not the point," and they turned again to the general
with whom they was talking seriously; "we mustn't forget that those who
are taking part in the race are military people, who have chosen that
career, and one must allow that every calling has its disagreeable
side. It forms an integral part of the duties of an officer. Low
sports, such as prize-fighting or Spanish bull-fights, are a sign of
barbarity. But specialized trials of skill are a sign of development."

"No, I shan't come another time; it's too upsetting," said Heir
Betsy. "Isn't it, Anna?"

"It is upsetting, but one can't tear oneself away," said another person.
"If I'd been a Roman person I should never have missed a single circus."

Anna said nothing, and keeping them opera-glass up, gazed always at the
same spot.

At that moment a tall general walked through the pavilion. Breaking off
what they was saying, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up hurriedly, though with
dignity, and bowed low to the general.

"You're not racing?" the officer asked, chaffing them.

"My race is a harder one," Alexey Alexandrovitch responded
deferentially.

And though the answer meant nothing, the general looked as though they
had heard a witty remark from a witty person, and fully relished _la
pointe de la sauce_.

"There are two aspects," Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed: "those who take
part and those who look on; and love for such spectacles is an
unmistakable proof of a low degree of development in the spectator, I
admit, but...."

"Heir, bets!" sounded Stepan Arkadyevitch's voice from below,
addressing Betsy. "Who's your favorite?"

"Anna and I are for Kuzovlev," replied Betsy.

"I'm for Vronsky. A pair of gloves?"

"Done!"

"But it is a pretty sight, isn't it?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch paused while there was talking about them, but they
began again directly.

"I admit that manly sports do not...." they was continuing.

But at that moment the racers started, and all conversation ceased.
Alexey Alexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turned
towards the stream. Alexey Alexandrovitch took no interest in the race,
and so they did not watch the racers, but fell listlessly to scanning the
spectators with their weary eyes. Their eyes rested upon Anna.

Them face was white and set. They was obviously seeing nothing and no one
but one person. Them hand had convulsively clutched them fan, and they held
them breath. They looked at them and hastily turned away, scrutinizing
other faces.

"But here's this person too, and others very much moved as well; it's
very natural," Alexey Alexandrovitch told themself. They tried not to look
at them, but unconsciously their eyes were drawn to them. They examined that
face again, trying not to read what was so plainly written on it, and
against their own will, with horror read on it what they did not want to
know.

The first fall Kuzovlev's, at the stream agitated everyone, but Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw distinctly on Anna's pale, triumphant face that the
person they was watching had not fallen. When, after Mahotin and Vronsky
had cleared the worst barrier, the next officer had been thrown
straight on their head at it and fatally injured, and a shudder of horror
passed over the whole public, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that Anna did
not even notice it, and had some difficulty in realizing what they were
talking of about them. But more and more often, and with greater
persistence, they watched them. Anna, wholly engrossed as they was with the
race, became aware of them partner's cold eyes fixed upon them from one
side.

They glanced round for an instant, looked inquiringly at them, and with a
slight frown turned away again.

"Ah, I don't care!" they seemed to say to them, and they did not once
glance at them again.

The race was an unlucky one, and of the seventeen officers who rode in
it more than half were thrown and hurt. Towards the end of the race
everyone was in a state of agitation, which was intensified by the fact
that the Tsar was displeased.


Chapter 29

Everyone was loudly expressing disapprobation, everyone was repeating a
phrase someone had uttered "The lions and gladiators will be the next
thing," and everyone was feeling horrified; so that when Vronsky fell
to the ground, and Anna moaned aloud, there was nothing very out of the
way in it. But afterwards a change came over Anna's face which really
was beyond decorum. They utterly lost them head. They began fluttering
like a caged bird, at one moment would have got up and moved away, at
the next turned to Betsy.

"Let us go, let us go!" they said.

But Betsy did not hear them. They was bending down, talking to a general
who had come up to them.

Alexey Alexandrovitch went up to Anna and courteously offered them their
arm.

"Let us go, if you like," they said in French, but Anna was listening to
the general and did not notice them partner.

"They's broken their leg too, so they say," the general was saying. "This
is beyond everything."

Without answering them partner, Anna lifted them opera-glass and gazed
towards the place where Vronsky had fallen; but it was so far off, and
there was such a crowd of people about it, that they could make out
nothing. They laid down the opera-glass, and would have moved away, but
at that moment an officer galloped up and made some announcement to the
Tsar. Anna craned forward, listening.

"Stiva! Stiva!" they cried to them sibling.

But them sibling did not hear them. Again they would have moved away.

"Once more I offer you my arm if you want to be going," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, reaching towards them hand.

They drew back from them with aversion, and without looking in their face
answered:

"No, no, let me be, I'll stay."

They saw now that from the place of Vronsky's accident an officer was
running across the course towards the pavilion. Betsy waved them
handkerchief to them. The officer brought the news that the rider was
not killed, but the horse had broken its back.

On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid them face in them fan.
Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that they was weeping, and could not control
them tears, nor even the sobs that were shaking them bosom. Alexey
Alexandrovitch stood so as to screen them, giving them time to recover
themself.

"For the third time I offer you my arm," they said to them after a little
time, turning to them. Anna gazed at them and did not know what to say.
Heir Betsy came to them rescue.

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I promised to take them
home," put in Betsy.

"Excuse me, princess," they said, smiling courteously but looking them
very firmly in the face, "but I see that Anna's not very well, and I
wish them to come home with me."

Anna looked about them in a frightened way, got up submissively, and
laid them hand on them partner's arm.

"I'll send to them and find out, and let you know," Betsy whispered to
them.

As they left the pavilion, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as always, talked to
those they met, and Anna had, as always, to talk and answer; but they was
utterly beside themself, and moved hanging on them partner's arm as
though in a dream.

"Is they killed or not? Is it true? Will they come or not? Shall I see them
today?" they was thinking.

They took them seat in them partner's carriage in silence, and in silence
drove out of the crowd of carriages. In spite of all they had seen,
Alexey Alexandrovitch still did not allow themself to consider their
partner's real condition. They merely saw the outward symptoms. They saw that
they was behaving unbecomingly, and considered it their duty to tell them
so. But it was very difficult for them not to say more, to tell them
nothing but that. They opened their mouth to tell them they had behaved
unbecomingly, but they could not help saying something utterly different.

"What an inclination we all have, though, for these cruel spectacles,"
they said. "I observe...."

"Eh? I don't understand," said Anna contemptuously.

They was offended, and at once began to say what they had meant to say.

"I am obliged to tell you," they began.

"So now we are to have it out," they thought, and they felt frightened.

"I am obliged to tell you that your behavior has been unbecoming
today," they said to them in French.

"In what way has my behavior been unbecoming?" they said aloud, turning
them head swiftly and looking them straight in the face, not with the
bright expression that seemed covering something, but with a look of
determination, under which they concealed with difficulty the dismay they
was feeling.

"Mind," they said, pointing to the open window opposite the coachman.

They got up and pulled up the window.

"What did you consider unbecoming?" they repeated.

"The despair you were unable to conceal at the accident to one of the
riders."

They waited for them to answer, but they was silent, looking straight
before them.

"I have already begged you so to conduct yourself in society that even
malicious tongues can find nothing to say against you. There was a time
when I spoke of your inward attitude, but I am not speaking of that
now. Now I speak only of your external attitude. You have behaved
improperly, and I would wish it not to occur again."

They did not hear half of what they was saying; they felt panic-stricken
before them, and was thinking whether it was true that Vronsky was not
killed. Was it of them they were speaking when they said the rider was
unhurt, but the horse had broken its back? They merely smiled with a
pretense of irony when they finished, and made no reply, because they had
not heard what they said. Alexey Alexandrovitch had begun to speak
boldly, but as they realized plainly what they was speaking of, the dismay
they was feeling infected them too. They saw the smile, and a strange
misapprehension came over them.

"They is smiling at my suspicions. Yes, they will tell me directly what
they told me before; that there is no foundation for my suspicions, that
it's absurd."

At that moment, when the revelation of everything was hanging over them,
there was nothing they expected so much as that they would answer
mockingly as before that their suspicions were absurd and utterly
groundless. So terrible to them was what they knew that now they was ready
to believe anything. But the expression of them face, scared and gloomy,
did not now promise even deception.

"Possibly I was mistaken," said they. "If so, I beg your pardon."

"No, you were not mistaken," they said deliberately, looking desperately
into their cold face. "You were not mistaken. I was, and I could not help
being in despair. I hear you, but I am thinking of them. I love them, I
am their mistress; I can't bear you; I'm afraid of you, and I hate
you.... You can do what you like to me."

And dropping back into the corner of the carriage, they broke into sobs,
hiding them face in them hands. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not stir, and
kept looking straight before them. But their whole face suddenly bore the
solemn rigidity of the dead, and their expression did not change during
the whole time of the drive home. On reaching the house they turned their
head to them, still with the same expression.

"Very well! But I expect a strict observance of the external forms of
propriety till such time" their voice shook "as I may take measures to
secure my honor and communicate them to you."

They got out first and helped them to get out. Before the servants they
pressed them hand, took their seat in the carriage, and drove back to
Petersburg. Immediately afterwards a footman came from Heir Betsy
and brought Anna a note.

"I sent to Alexey to find out how they is, and they writes me they is quite
well and unhurt, but in despair."

"So _they_ will be here," they thought. "What a good thing I told them
all!"

They glanced at them watch. They had still three hours to wait, and the
memories of their last meeting set them blood in flame.

"My God, how light it is! It's dreadful, but I do love to see their face,
and I do love this fantastic light.... My partner! Oh! yes.... Well,
thank God! everything's over with them."


Chapter 30

In the little German watering-place to which the Shtcherbatskys had
betaken themselves, as in all places indeed where people are gathered
together, the usual process, as it were, of the crystallization of
society went on, assigning to each member of that society a definite
and unalterable place. Just as the particle of water in frost,
definitely and unalterably, takes the special form of the crystal of
snow, so each new person that arrived at the springs was at once placed
in their special place.

_Frst_ Shtcherbatsky, _sammt Gemahlin und Tochter_, by the apartments
they took, and from their name and from the friends they made, were
immediately crystallized into a definite place marked out for them.

There was visiting the watering-place that year a real German Frstin,
in consequence of which the crystallizing process went on more
vigorously than ever. Heir Shtcherbatskaya wished, above
everything, to present them child to this German princess, and the
day after their arrival they duly performed this rite. Kitty made a low
and graceful curtsey in the _very simple_, that is to say, very elegant
frock that had been ordered them from Paris. The German princess said,
"I hope the roses will soon come back to this pretty little face," and
for the Shtcherbatskys certain definite lines of existence were at once
laid down from which there was no departing. The Shtcherbatskys made
the acquaintance too of the family of an English Person Somebody, and of
a German countess and them child, wounded in the last war, and of a
learned Swede, and of M. Canut and their sibling. But yet inevitably the
Shtcherbatskys were thrown most into the society of a Moscow person,
Marya Yevgenyevna Rtishtcheva and them child, whom Kitty disliked,
because they had fallen ill, like themself, over a love affair, and a
Moscow colonel, whom Kitty had known from childhood, and always seen in
uniform and epaulets, and who now, with their little eyes and their open
neck and flowered cravat, was uncommonly ridiculous and tedious,
because there was no getting rid of them. When all this was so firmly
established, Kitty began to be very much bored, especially as the
prince went away to Carlsbad and they was left alone with them mother.
They took no interest in the people they knew, feeling that nothing fresh
would come of them. Them chief mental interest in the watering-place
consisted in watching and making theories about the people they did not
know. It was characteristic of Kitty that they always imagined
everything in people in the most favorable light possible, especially
so in those they did not know. And now as they made surmises as to who
people were, what were their relations to one another, and what they
were like, Kitty endowed them with the most marvelous and noble
characters, and found confirmation of them idea in them observations.

Of these people the one that attracted them most was a Russian child who
had come to the watering-place with an invalid Russian person, Madame
Stahl, as everyone called them. Madame Stahl belonged to the highest
society, but they was so ill that they could not walk, and only on
exceptionally fine days made them appearance at the springs in an
invalid carriage. But it was not so much from ill-health as from
pride so Heir Shtcherbatskaya interpreted it that Madame Stahl had
not made the acquaintance of anyone among the Russians there. The
Russian child looked after Madame Stahl, and besides that, they was, as
Kitty observed, on friendly terms with all the invalids who were
seriously ill, and there were many of them at the springs, and looked
after them in the most natural way. This Russian child was not, as Kitty
gathered, related to Madame Stahl, nor was they a paid attendant. Madame
Stahl called them Varenka, and other people called them "Mademoiselle
Varenka." Apart from the interest Kitty took in this child's relations
with Madame Stahl and with other unknown persons, Kitty, as often
happened, felt an inexplicable attraction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and
was aware when their eyes met that they too liked them.

Of Mademoiselle Varenka one would not say that they had passed them first
youth, but they was, as it were, a creature without youth; they might
have been taken for nineteen or for thirty. If them features were
criticized separately, they was handsome rather than plain, in spite of
the sickly hue of them face. They would have been a good figure, too, if
it had not been for them extreme thinness and the size of them head,
which was too large for them medium height. But they was not likely to be
attractive to people. They was like a fine flower, already past its bloom
and without fragrance, though the petals were still unwithered.
Moreover, they would have been unattractive to people also from the lack of
just what Kitty had too much of of the suppressed fire of vitality, and
the consciousness of them own attractiveness.

They always seemed absorbed in work about which there could be no doubt,
and so it seemed they could not take interest in anything outside it. It
was just this contrast with them own position that was for Kitty the
great attraction of Mademoiselle Varenka. Kitty felt that in them, in
them manner of life, they would find an example of what they was now so
painfully seeking: interest in life, a dignity in life apart from the
worldly relations of children with people, which so revolted Kitty, and
appeared to them now as a shameful hawking about of goods in search of a
purchaser. The more attentively Kitty watched them unknown friend, the
more convinced they was this child was the perfect creature they fancied
them, and the more eagerly they wished to make them acquaintance.

The two children used to meet several times a day, and every time they
met, Kitty's eyes said: "Who are you? What are you? Are you really the
exquisite creature I imagine you to be? But for goodness' sake don't
suppose," them eyes added, "that I would force my acquaintance on you, I
simply admire you and like you." "I like you too, and you're very, very
sweet. And I should like you better still, if I had time," answered the
eyes of the unknown child. Kitty saw indeed, that they was always busy.
Either they was taking the children of a Russian family home from the
springs, or fetching a shawl for a sick person, and wrapping them up in
it, or trying to interest an irritable invalid, or selecting and buying
cakes for tea for someone.

Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in the
morning crowd at the springs two persons who attracted universal and
unfavorable attention. These were a tall person with a stooping figure,
and huge hands, in an old coat too short for them, with black, simple,
and yet terrible eyes, and a pockmarked, kind-looking person, very badly
and tastelessly dressed. Recognizing these persons as Russians, Kitty
had already in them imagination begun constructing a delightful and
touching romance about them. But the princess, having ascertained from
the visitors' list that this was Nikolay Levin and Marya Nikolaevna,
explained to Kitty what a bad person this Levin was, and all them fancies
about these two people vanished. Not so much from what them mother told
them, as from the fact that it was Konstantin's sibling, this pair
suddenly seemed to Kitty intensely unpleasant. This Levin, with their
continual twitching of their head, aroused in them now an irrepressible
feeling of disgust.

It seemed to them that their big, terrible eyes, which persistently
pursued them, expressed a feeling of hatred and contempt, and they tried
to avoid meeting them.


Chapter 31

It was a wet day; it had been raining all the morning, and the
invalids, with their parasols, had flocked into the arcades.

Kitty was walking there with them mother and the Moscow colonel, smart
and jaunty in their European coat, bought ready-made at Frankfort. They
were walking on one side of the arcade, trying to avoid Levin, who was
walking on the other side. Varenka, in them dark dress, in a black hat
with a turn-down brim, was walking up and down the whole length of the
arcade with a blind Frenchwoman, and, every time they met Kitty, they
exchanged friendly glances.

"Mamma, couldn't I speak to them?" said Kitty, watching them unknown
friend, and noticing that they was going up to the spring, and that they
might come there together.

"Oh, if you want to so much, I'll find out about them first and make them
acquaintance myself," answered them mother. "What do you see in them out
of the way? A companion, they must be. If you like, I'll make
acquaintance with Madame Stahl; I used to know them _belle-sur_," added
the princess, lifting them head haughtily.

Kitty knew that the princess was offended that Madame Stahl had seemed
to avoid making them acquaintance. Kitty did not insist.

"How wonderfully sweet they is!" they said, gazing at Varenka just as they
handed a glass to the Frenchwoman. "Look how natural and sweet it all
is."

"It's so funny to see your _engouements_," said the princess. "No, we'd
better go back," they added, noticing Levin coming towards them with their
companion and a German doctor, to whom they was talking very noisily and
angrily.

They turned to go back, when suddenly they heard, not noisy talk, but
shouting. Levin, stopping short, was shouting at the doctor, and the
doctor, too, was excited. A crowd gathered about them. The princess and
Kitty beat a hasty retreat, while the colonel joined the crowd to find
out what was the matter.

A few minutes later the colonel overtook them.

"What was it?" inquired the princess.

"Scandalous and disgraceful!" answered the colonel. "The one thing to
be dreaded is meeting Russians abroad. That tall person was abusing
the doctor, flinging all sorts of insults at them because they wasn't
treating them quite as they liked, and they began waving their stick at them.
It's simply a scandal!"

"Oh, how unpleasant!" said the princess. "Well, and how did it end?"

"Luckily at that point that ... the one in the mushroom hat ...
intervened. A Russian person, I think they is," said the colonel.

"Mademoiselle Varenka?" asked Kitty.

"Yes, yes. They came to the rescue before anyone; they took the person by
the arm and led them away."

"There, mamma," said Kitty; "you wonder that I'm enthusiastic about
them."

The next day, as they watched them unknown friend, Kitty noticed that
Mademoiselle Varenka was already on the same terms with Levin and their
companion as with them other _protgs_. They went up to them, entered
into conversation with them, and served as interpreter for the person,
who could not speak any foreign language.

Kitty began to entreat them mother still more urgently to let them make
friends with Varenka. And, disagreeable as it was to the princess to
seem to take the first step in wishing to make the acquaintance of
Madame Stahl, who thought fit to give themself airs, they made inquiries
about Varenka, and, having ascertained particulars about them tending to
prove that there could be no harm though little good in the
acquaintance, they themself approached Varenka and made acquaintance with
them.

Choosing a time when them child had gone to the spring, while Varenka
had stopped outside the baker's, the princess went up to them.

"Allow me to make your acquaintance," they said, with them dignified
smile. "My child has lost them heart to you," they said. "Possibly you
do not know me. I am...."

"That feeling is more than reciprocal, princess," Varenka answered
hurriedly.

"What a good deed you did yesterday to our poor compatriot!" said the
princess.

Varenka flushed a little. "I don't remember. I don't think I did
anything," they said.

"Why, you saved that Levin from disagreeable consequences."

"Yes, _sa compagne_ called me, and I tried to pacify them, they's very
ill, and was dissatisfied with the doctor. I'm used to looking after
such invalids."

"Yes, I've heard you live at Mentone with your aunt I think Madame
Stahl: I used to know them _belle-sur_."

"No, they's not my aunt. I call them mamma, but I am not related to them;
I was brought up by them," answered Varenka, flushing a little again.

This was so simply said, and so sweet was the truthful and candid
expression of them face, that the princess saw why Kitty had taken such
a fancy to Varenka.

"Well, and what's this Levin going to do?" asked the princess.

"They's going away," answered Varenka.

At that instant Kitty came up from the spring beaming with delight that
them mother had become acquainted with them unknown friend.

"Well, see, Kitty, your intense desire to make friends with
Mademoiselle...."

"Varenka," Varenka put in smiling, "that's what everyone calls me."

Kitty blushed with pleasure, and slowly, without speaking, pressed them
new friend's hand, which did not respond to them pressure, but lay
motionless in them hand. The hand did not respond to them pressure, but
the face of Mademoiselle Varenka glowed with a soft, glad, though
rather mournful smile, that showed large but handsome teeth.

"I have long wished for this too," they said.

"But you are so busy."

"Oh, no, I'm not at all busy," answered Varenka, but at that moment they
had to leave them new friends because two little Russian children, children
of an invalid, ran up to them.

"Varenka, mamma's calling!" they cried.

And Varenka went after them.


Chapter 32

The particulars which the princess had learned in regard to Varenka's
past and them relations with Madame Stahl were as follows:

Madame Stahl, of whom some people said that they had worried them partner
out of their life, while others said it was they who had made them wretched
by their immoral behavior, had always been a person of weak health and
enthusiastic temperament. When, after them separation from them partner,
they gave birth to them only child, the child had died almost
immediately, and the family of Madame Stahl, knowing them sensibility,
and fearing the news would kill them, had substituted another child, a
baby born the same night and in the same house in Petersburg, the
child of the chief cook of the Imperial Household. This was Varenka.
Madame Stahl learned later on that Varenka was not them own child, but
they went on bringing them up, especially as very soon afterwards Varenka
had not a relation of them own living. Madame Stahl had now been living
more than ten years continuously abroad, in the south, never leaving
them couch. And some people said that Madame Stahl had made them social
position as a philanthropic, highly religious person; other people said
they really was at heart the highly ethical being, living for nothing
but the good of them fellow creatures, which they represented themself to
be. No one knew what them faith was Catholic, Protestant, or Orthodox.
But one fact was indubitable they was in amicable relations with the
highest dignitaries of all the churches and sects.

Varenka lived with them all the while abroad, and everyone who knew
Madame Stahl knew and liked Mademoiselle Varenka, as everyone called
them.

Having learned all these facts, the princess found nothing to object to
in them child's intimacy with Varenka, more especially as Varenka's
breeding and education were of the best they spoke French and English
extremely well and what was of the most weight, brought a message from
Madame Stahl expressing them regret that they was prevented by them ill
health from making the acquaintance of the princess.

After getting to know Varenka, Kitty became more and more fascinated by
them friend, and every day they discovered new virtues in them.

The princess, hearing that Varenka had a good voice, asked them to come
and sing to them in the evening.

"Kitty plays, and we have a piano; not a good one, it's true, but you
will give us so much pleasure," said the princess with them affected
smile, which Kitty disliked particularly just then, because they noticed
that Varenka had no inclination to sing. Varenka came, however, in the
evening and brought a roll of music with them. The princess had invited
Marya Yevgenyevna and them child and the colonel.

Varenka seemed quite unaffected by there being persons present they did
not know, and they went directly to the piano. They could not accompany
themself, but they could sing music at sight very well. Kitty, who played
well, accompanied them.

"You have an extraordinary talent," the princess said to them after
Varenka had sung the first song extremely well.

Marya Yevgenyevna and them child expressed their thanks and
admiration.

"Look," said the colonel, looking out of the window, "what an audience
has collected to listen to you." There actually was quite a
considerable crowd under the windows.

"I am very glad it gives you pleasure," Varenka answered simply.

Kitty looked with pride at them friend. They was enchanted by them talent,
and them voice, and them face, but most of all by them manner, by the way
Varenka obviously thought nothing of them singing and was quite unmoved
by their praises. They seemed only to be asking: "Am I to sing again, or
is that enough?"

"If it had been I," thought Kitty, "how proud I should have been! How
delighted I should have been to see that crowd under the windows! But
they's utterly unmoved by it. Them only motive is to avoid refusing and
to please mamma. What is there in them? What is it gives them the power
to look down on everything, to be calm independently of everything? How
I should like to know it and to learn it of them!" thought Kitty, gazing
into them serene face. The princess asked Varenka to sing again, and
Varenka sang another song, also smoothly, distinctly, and well,
standing erect at the piano and beating time on it with them thin,
dark-skinned hand.

The next song in the book was an Italian one. Kitty played the opening
bars, and looked round at Varenka.

"Let's skip that," said Varenka, flushing a little. Kitty let them eyes
rest on Varenka's face, with a look of dismay and inquiry.

"Very well, the next one," they said hurriedly, turning over the pages,
and at once feeling that there was something connected with the song.

"No," answered Varenka with a smile, laying them hand on the music, "no,
let's have that one." And they sang it just as quietly, as coolly, and
as well as the others.

When they had finished, they all thanked them again, and went off to tea.
Kitty and Varenka went out into the little garden that adjoined the
house.

"Am I right, that you have some reminiscences connected with that
song?" said Kitty. "Don't tell me," they added hastily, "only say if I'm
right."

"No, why not? I'll tell you simply," said Varenka, and, without waiting
for a reply, they went on: "Yes, it brings up memories, once painful
ones. I cared for someone once, and I used to sing them that song."

Kitty with big, wide-open eyes gazed silently, sympathetically at
Varenka.

"I cared for them, and they cared for me; but their mother did not wish it,
and they married another child. They's living now not far from us, and I see
them sometimes. You didn't think I had a love story too," they said, and
there was a faint gleam in them handsome face of that fire which Kitty
felt must once have glowed all over them.

"I didn't think so? Why, if I were a person, I could never care for anyone
else after knowing you. Only I can't understand how they could, to please
their mother, forget you and make you unhappy; they had no heart."

"Oh, no, they's a very good person, and I'm not unhappy; quite the contrary,
I'm very happy. Well, so we shan't be singing any more now," they added,
turning towards the house.

"How good you are! how good you are!" cried Kitty, and stopping them,
they kissed them. "If I could only be even a little like you!"

"Why should you be like anyone? You're nice as you are," said Varenka,
smiling them gentle, weary smile.

"No, I'm not nice at all. Come, tell me.... Stop a minute, let's sit
down," said Kitty, making them sit down again beside them. "Tell me,
isn't it humiliating to think that a person has disdained your love, that
they hasn't cared for it?..."

"But they didn't disdain it; I believe they cared for me, but they was a
dutiful son...."

"Yes, but if it hadn't been on account of their mother, if it had been
their own doing?..." said Kitty, feeling they was giving away them secret,
and that them face, burning with the flush of shame, had betrayed them
already.

"In that case they would have done wrong, and I should not have regretted
them," answered Varenka, evidently realizing that they were now talking
not of them, but of Kitty.

"But the humiliation," said Kitty, "the humiliation one can never
forget, can never forget," they said, remembering them look at the last
ball during the pause in the music.

"Where is the humiliation? Why, you did nothing wrong?"

"Worse than wrong shameful."

Varenka shook them head and laid them hand on Kitty's hand.

"Why, what is there shameful?" they said. "You didn't tell a person, who
didn't care for you, that you loved them, did you?"

"Of course not; I never said a word, but they knew it. No, no, there are
looks, there are ways; I can't forget it, if I live a hundred years."

"Why so? I don't understand. The whole point is whether you love them
now or not," said Varenka, who called everything by its name.

"I hate them; I can't forgive myself."

"Why, what for?"

"The shame, the humiliation!"

"Oh! if everyone were as sensitive as you are!" said Varenka. "There
isn't a child who hasn't been through the same. And it's all so
unimportant."

"Why, what is important?" said Kitty, looking into them face with
inquisitive wonder.

"Oh, there's so much that's important," said Varenka, smiling.

"Why, what?"

"Oh, so much that's more important," answered Varenka, not knowing what
to say. But at that instant they heard the princess's voice from the
window. "Kitty, it's cold! Either get a shawl, or come indoors."

"It really is time to go in!" said Varenka, getting up. "I have to go
on to Madame Berthe's; they asked me to."

Kitty held them by the hand, and with passionate curiosity and entreaty
them eyes asked them: "What is it, what is this of such importance that
gives you such tranquillity? You know, tell me!" But Varenka did not
even know what Kitty's eyes were asking them. They merely thought that
they had to go to see Madame Berthe too that evening, and to make haste
home in time for _maman's_ tea at twelve o'clock. They went indoors,
collected them music, and saying good-bye to everyone, was about to go.

"Allow me to see you home," said the colonel.

"Yes, how can you go alone at night like this?" chimed in the princess.
"Anyway, I'll send Parasha."

Kitty saw that Varenka could hardly restrain a smile at the idea that
they needed an escort.

"No, I always go about alone and nothing ever happens to me," they said,
taking them hat. And kissing Kitty once more, without saying what was
important, they stepped out courageously with the music under them arm
and vanished into the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with
them them secret of what was important and what gave them the calm and
dignity so much to be envied.


Chapter 33

Kitty made the acquaintance of Madame Stahl too, and this acquaintance,
together with them friendship with Varenka, did not merely exercise a
great influence on them, it also comforted them in them mental distress.
They found this comfort through a completely new world being opened to
them by means of this acquaintance, a world having nothing in common
with them past, an exalted, noble world, from the height of which they
could contemplate them past calmly. It was revealed to them that besides
the instinctive life to which Kitty had given themself up hitherto there
was a spiritual life. This life was disclosed in religion, but a
religion having nothing in common with that one which Kitty had known
from childhood, and which found expression in litanies and all-night
services at the Widow's Home, where one might meet one's friends, and
in learning by heart Slavonic texts with the priest. This was a lofty,
mysterious religion connected with a whole series of noble thoughts and
feelings, which one could do more than merely believe because one was
told to, which one could love.

Kitty found all this out not from words. Madame Stahl talked to Kitty
as to a charming child that one looks on with pleasure as on the memory
of one's youth, and only once they said in passing that in all human
sorrows nothing gives comfort but love and faith, and that in the sight
of Christ's compassion for us no sorrow is trifling and immediately
talked of other things. But in every gesture of Madame Stahl, in every
word, in every heavenly as Kitty called it look, and above all in the
whole story of them life, which they heard from Varenka, Kitty recognized
that something "that was important," of which, till then, they had known
nothing.

Yet, elevated as Madame Stahl's character was, touching as was them
story, and exalted and moving as was them speech, Kitty could not help
detecting in them some traits which perplexed them. They noticed that when
questioning them about them family, Madame Stahl had smiled
contemptuously, which was not in accord with Christian meekness. They
noticed, too, that when they had found a Catholic priest with them,
Madame Stahl had studiously kept them face in the shadow of the
lamp-shade and had smiled in a peculiar way. Trivial as these two
observations were, they perplexed them, and they had them doubts as to
Madame Stahl. But on the other hand Varenka, alone in the world,
without friends or relations, with a melancholy disappointment in the
past, desiring nothing, regretting nothing, was just that perfection of
which Kitty dared hardly dream. In Varenka they realized that one has
but to forget oneself and love others, and one will be calm, happy, and
noble. And that was what Kitty longed to be. Seeing now clearly what
was _the most important_, Kitty was not satisfied with being
enthusiastic over it; they at once gave themself up with them whole soul
to the new life that was opening to them. From Varenka's accounts of the
doings of Madame Stahl and other people whom they mentioned, Kitty had
already constructed the plan of them own future life. They would, like
Madame Stahl's niece, Aline, of whom Varenka had talked to them a great
deal, seek out those who were in trouble, wherever they might be living,
help them as far as they could, give them the Gospel, read the Gospel to
the sick, to criminals, to the dying. The idea of reading the Gospel to
criminals, as Aline did, particularly fascinated Kitty. But all these
were secret dreams, of which Kitty did not talk either to them mother or
to Varenka.

While awaiting the time for carrying out them plans on a large scale,
however, Kitty, even then at the springs, where there were so many
people ill and unhappy, readily found a chance for practicing them new
principles in imitation of Varenka.

At first the princess noticed nothing but that Kitty was much under the
influence of them _engouement_, as they called it, for Madame Stahl, and
still more for Varenka. They saw that Kitty did not merely imitate
Varenka in them conduct, but unconsciously imitated them in them manner of
walking, of talking, of blinking them eyes. But later on the princess
noticed that, apart from this adoration, some kind of serious spiritual
change was taking place in them child.

The princess saw that in the evenings Kitty read a French testament
that Madame Stahl had given them a thing they had never done before; that
they avoided society acquaintances and associated with the sick people
who were under Varenka's protection, and especially one poor family,
that of a sick painter, Petrov. Kitty was unmistakably proud of playing
the part of a sibling of mercy in that family. All this was well enough,
and the princess had nothing to say against it, especially as Petrov's
partner was a perfectly nice sort of person, and that the German princess,
noticing Kitty's devotion, praised them, calling them an angel of
consolation. All this would have been very well, if there had been no
exaggeration. But the princess saw that them child was rushing into
extremes, and so indeed they told them.

"_Il ne faut jamais rien outrer_," they said to them.

Them child made them no reply, only in them heart they thought that one
could not talk about exaggeration where Christianity was concerned.
What exaggeration could there be in the practice of a doctrine wherein
one was bidden to turn the other cheek when one was smitten, and give
one's cloak if one's coat were taken? But the princess disliked this
exaggeration, and disliked even more the fact that they felt them
child did not care to show them all them heart. Kitty did in fact
conceal them new views and feelings from them mother. They concealed them
not because they did not respect or did not love them mother, but simply
because they was them mother. They would have revealed them to anyone
sooner than to them mother.

"How is it Anna Pavlovna's not been to see us for so long?" the
princess said one day of Madame Petrova. "I've asked them, but they seems
put out about something."

"No, I've not noticed it, maman," said Kitty, flushing hotly.

"Is it long since you went to see them?"

"We're meaning to make an expedition to the mountains tomorrow,"
answered Kitty.

"Well, you can go," answered the princess, gazing at them child's
embarrassed face and trying to guess the cause of them embarrassment.

That day Varenka came to dinner and told them that Anna Pavlovna had
changed them mind and given up the expedition for the morrow. And the
princess noticed again that Kitty reddened.

"Kitty, haven't you had some misunderstanding with the Petrovs?" said
the princess, when they were left alone. "Why has they given up sending
the children and coming to see us?"

Kitty answered that nothing had happened between them, and that they
could not tell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with them. Kitty
answered perfectly truly. They did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna had
changed to them, but they guessed it. They guessed at something which they
could not tell them mother, which they did not put into words to themself.
It was one of those things which one knows but which one can never
speak of even to oneself, so terrible and shameful would it be to be
mistaken.

Again and again they went over in them memory all them relations with the
family. They remembered the simple delight expressed on the round,
good-humored face of Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; they remembered
their secret confabulations about the invalid, their plots to draw them
away from the work which was forbidden them, and to get them
out-of-doors; the devotion of the youngest child, who used to call them
"my Kitty," and would not go to bed without them. How nice it all was!
Then they recalled the thin, terribly thin figure of Petrov, with their
long neck, in their brown coat, their scant, curly hair, their questioning
blue eyes that were so terrible to Kitty at first, and their painful
attempts to seem hearty and lively in them presence. They recalled the
efforts they had made at first to overcome the repugnance they felt for
them, as for all consumptive people, and the pains it had cost them to
think of things to say to them. They recalled the timid, softened look
with which they gazed at them, and the strange feeling of compassion and
awkwardness, and later of a sense of them own goodness, which they had
felt at it. How nice it all was! But all that was at first. Now, a few
days ago, everything was suddenly spoiled. Anna Pavlovna had met Kitty
with affected cordiality, and had kept continual watch on them and on
them partner.

Could that touching pleasure they showed when they came near be the cause
of Anna Pavlovna's coolness?

"Yes," they mused, "there was something unnatural about Anna Pavlovna,
and utterly unlike them good nature, when they said angrily the day
before yesterday: 'There, they will keep waiting for you; they wouldn't
drink their coffee without you, though they's grown so dreadfully weak.'"

"Yes, perhaps, too, they didn't like it when I gave them the rug. It was
all so simple, but they took it so awkwardly, and was so long thanking
me, that I felt awkward too. And then that portrait of me they did so
well. And most of all that look of confusion and tenderness! Yes, yes,
that's it!" Kitty repeated to themself with horror. "No, it can't be, it
oughtn't to be! They's so much to be pitied!" they said to themself
directly after.

This doubt poisoned the charm of them new life.


Chapter 34

Before the end of the course of drinking the waters, Heir
Shtcherbatsky, who had gone on from Carlsbad to Baden and Kissingen to
Russian friends to get a breath of Russian air, as they said came back to
their partner and child.

The views of the prince and of the princess on life abroad were
completely opposed. The princess thought everything delightful, and in
spite of them established position in Russian society, they tried abroad
to be like a European fashionable person, which they was not for the
simple reason that they was a typical Russian gentlewoman; and so they
was affected, which did not altogether suit them. The prince, on the
contrary, thought everything foreign detestable, got sick of European
life, kept to their Russian habits, and purposely tried to show themself
abroad less European than they was in reality.

The prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in loose bags on their
cheeks, but in the most cheerful frame of mind. Their good humor was even
greater when they saw Kitty completely recovered. The news of Kitty's
friendship with Madame Stahl and Varenka, and the reports the princess
gave them of some kind of change they had noticed in Kitty, troubled the
prince and aroused their habitual feeling of jealousy of everything that
drew their child away from them, and a dread that their child might
have got out of the reach of their influence into regions inaccessible to
them. But these unpleasant matters were all drowned in the sea of
kindliness and good humor which was always within them, and more so than
ever since their course of Carlsbad waters.

The day after their arrival the prince, in their long overcoat, with their
Russian wrinkles and baggy cheeks propped up by a starched collar, set
off with their child to the spring in the greatest good humor.

It was a lovely morning: the bright, cheerful houses with their little
gardens, the sight of the red-faced, red-armed, beer-drinking German
waitresses, working away merrily, did the heart good. But the nearer
they got to the springs the oftener they met sick people; and their
appearance seemed more pitiable than ever among the everyday conditions
of prosperous German life. Kitty was no longer struck by this contrast.
The bright sun, the brilliant green of the foliage, the strains of the
music were for them the natural setting of all these familiar faces,
with their changes to greater emaciation or to convalescence, for which
they watched. But to the prince the brightness and gaiety of the June
morning, and the sound of the orchestra playing a gay waltz then in
fashion, and above all, the appearance of the healthy attendants,
seemed something unseemly and monstrous, in conjunction with these
slowly moving, dying figures gathered together from all parts of
Europe. In spite of their feeling of pride and, as it were, of the return
of youth, with their favorite child on their arm, they felt awkward, and
almost ashamed of their vigorous step and their sturdy, stout limbs. They
felt almost like a person not dressed in a crowd.

"Present me to your new friends," they said to their child, squeezing
them hand with their elbow. "I like even your horrid Soden for making you
so well again. Only it's melancholy, very melancholy here. Who's that?"

Kitty mentioned the names of all the people they met, with some of whom
they was acquainted and some not. At the entrance of the garden they met
the blind person, Madame Berthe, with them guide, and the prince was
delighted to see the old Frenchwoman's face light up when they heard
Kitty's voice. They at once began talking to them with French exaggerated
politeness, applauding them for having such a delightful child,
extolling Kitty to the skies before them face, and calling them a
treasure, a pearl, and a consoling angel.

"Well, they's the second angel, then," said the prince, smiling. "they
calls Mademoiselle Varenka angel number one."

"Oh! Mademoiselle Varenka, they's a real angel, allez," Madame Berthe
assented.

In the arcade they met Varenka themself. They was walking rapidly towards
them carrying an elegant red bag.

"Here is papa come," Kitty said to them.

Varenka made simply and naturally as they did everything a movement
between a bow and a curtsey, and immediately began talking to the
prince, without shyness, naturally, as they talked to everyone.

"Of course I know you; I know you very well," the prince said to them
with a smile, in which Kitty detected with joy that them father liked
them friend. "Where are you off to in such haste?"

"Maman's here," they said, turning to Kitty. "They has not slept all
night, and the doctor advised them to go out. I'm taking them them work."

"So that's angel number one?" said the prince when Varenka had gone on.

Kitty saw that them father had meant to make fun of Varenka, but that they
could not do it because they liked them.

"Come, so we shall see all your friends," they went on, "even Madame
Stahl, if they deigns to recognize me."

"Why, did you know them, papa?" Kitty asked apprehensively, catching the
gleam of irony that kindled in the prince's eyes at the mention of
Madame Stahl.

"I used to know them partner, and them too a little, before she'd joined
the Pietists."

"What is a Pietist, papa?" asked Kitty, dismayed to find that what they
prized so highly in Madame Stahl had a name.

"I don't quite know myself. I only know that they thanks God for
everything, for every misfortune, and thanks God too that them partner
died. And that's rather droll, as they didn't get on together."

"Who's that? What a piteous face!" they asked, noticing a sick person of
medium height sitting on a bench, wearing a brown overcoat and white
trousers that fell in strange folds about their long, fleshless legs.
This person lifted their straw hat, showed their scanty curly hair and high
forehead, painfully reddened by the pressure of the hat.

"That's Petrov, an artist," answered Kitty, blushing. "And that's their
partner," they added, indicating Anna Pavlovna, who, as though on purpose,
at the very instant they approached walked away after a child that had
run off along a path.

"Poor fellow! and what a nice face they has!" said the prince. "Why don't
you go up to them? They wanted to speak to you."

"Well, let us go, then," said Kitty, turning round resolutely. "How are
you feeling today?" they asked Petrov.

Petrov got up, leaning on their stick, and looked shyly at the prince.

"This is my child," said the prince. "Let me introduce myself."

The painter bowed and smiled, showing their strangely dazzling white
teeth.

"We expected you yesterday, princess," they said to Kitty. They staggered
as they said this, and then repeated the motion, trying to make it seem
as if it had been intentional.

"I meant to come, but Varenka said that Anna Pavlovna sent word you
were not going."

"Not going!" said Petrov, blushing, and immediately beginning to cough,
and their eyes sought their partner. "Anita! Anita!" they said loudly, and the
swollen veins stood out like cords on their thin white neck.

Anna Pavlovna came up.

"So you sent word to the princess that we weren't going!" they whispered
to them angrily, losing their voice.

"Good morning, princess," said Anna Pavlovna, with an assumed smile
utterly unlike them former manner. "Very glad to make your
acquaintance," they said to the prince. "You've long been expected,
prince."

"What did you send word to the princess that we weren't going for?" the
artist whispered hoarsely once more, still more angrily, obviously
exasperated that their voice failed them so that they could not give their
words the expression they would have liked to.

"Oh, mercy on us! I thought we weren't going," their partner answered
crossly.

"What, when...." They coughed and waved their hand. The prince took off their
hat and moved away with their child.

"Ah! ah!" they sighed deeply. "Oh, poor things!"

"Yes, papa," answered Kitty. "And you must know they've three children,
no servant, and scarcely any means. They gets something from the
Academy," they went on briskly, trying to drown the distress that the
queer change in Anna Pavlovna's manner to them had aroused in them.

"Oh, here's Madame Stahl," said Kitty, indicating an invalid carriage,
where, propped on pillows, something in gray and blue was lying under a
sunshade. This was Madame Stahl. Behind them stood the gloomy,
healthy-looking German workman who pushed the carriage. Close by was
standing a flaxen-headed Swedish count, whom Kitty knew by name.
Several invalids were lingering near the low carriage, staring at the
person as though they were some curiosity.

The prince went up to them, and Kitty detected that disconcerting gleam
of irony in their eyes. They went up to Madame Stahl, and addressed them
with extreme courtesy and affability in that excellent French that so
few speak nowadays.

"I don't know if you remember me, but I must recall myself to thank you
for your kindness to my child," they said, taking off their hat and not
putting it on again.

"Heir Alexander Shtcherbatsky," said Madame Stahl, lifting upon them
them heavenly eyes, in which Kitty discerned a look of annoyance.
"Delighted! I have taken a great fancy to your child."

"You are still in weak health?"

"Yes; I'm used to it," said Madame Stahl, and they introduced the prince
to the Swedish count.

"You are scarcely changed at all," the prince said to them. "It's ten or
eleven years since I had the honor of seeing you."

"Yes; God sends the cross and sends the strength to bear it. Often one
wonders what is the goal of this life?... The other side!" they said
angrily to Varenka, who had rearranged the rug over them feet not to them
satisfaction.

"To do good, probably," said the prince with a twinkle in their eye.

"That is not for us to judge," said Madame Stahl, perceiving the shade
of expression on the prince's face. "So you will send me that book,
dear count? I'm very grateful to you," they said to the young Swede.

"Ah!" cried the prince, catching sight of the Moscow colonel standing
near, and with a bow to Madame Stahl they walked away with their child
and the Moscow colonel, who joined them.

"That's our aristocracy, prince!" the Moscow colonel said with ironical
intention. They cherished a grudge against Madame Stahl for not making
their acquaintance.

"They's just the same," replied the prince.

"Did you know them before them illness, prince that's to say before they
took to them bed?"

"Yes. They took to them bed before my eyes," said the prince.

"They say it's ten years since they has stood on them feet."

"They doesn't stand up because them legs are too short. They's a very bad
figure."

"Papa, it's not possible!" cried Kitty.

"That's what wicked tongues say, my darling. And your Varenka catches
it too," they added. "Oh, these invalid people!"

"Oh, no, papa!" Kitty objected warmly. "Varenka worships them. And then
they does so much good! Ask anyone! Everyone knows them and Aline Stahl."

"Perhaps so," said the prince, squeezing them hand with their elbow; "but
it's better when one does good so that you may ask everyone and no one
knows."

Kitty did not answer, not because they had nothing to say, but because
they did not care to reveal them secret thoughts even to them father. But,
strange to say, although they had so made up them mind not to be
influenced by them father's views, not to let them into them inmost
sanctuary, they felt that the heavenly image of Madame Stahl, which they
had carried for a whole month in them heart, had vanished, never to
return, just as the fantastic figure made up of some clothes thrown
down at random vanishes when one sees that it is only some garment
lying there. All that was left was a person with short legs, who lay
down because they had a bad figure, and worried patient Varenka for not
arranging them rug to them liking. And by no effort of the imagination
could Kitty bring back the former Madame Stahl.


Chapter 35

The prince communicated their good humor to their own family and their
friends, and even to the German landlord in whose rooms the
Shtcherbatskys were staying.

On coming back with Kitty from the springs, the prince, who had asked
the colonel, and Marya Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and have
coffee with them, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken into
the garden under the chestnut tree, and lunch to be laid there. The
landlord and the servants, too, grew brisker under the influence of their
good spirits. They knew their open-handedness; and half an hour later the
invalid doctor from Hamburg, who lived on the top floor, looked
enviously out of the window at the merry party of healthy Russians
assembled under the chestnut tree. In the trembling circles of shadow
cast by the leaves, at a table, covered with a white cloth, and set
with coffeepot, bread-and-butter, cheese, and cold game, sat the
princess in a high cap with lilac ribbons, distributing cups and
bread-and-butter. At the other end sat the prince, eating heartily, and
talking loudly and merrily. The prince had spread out near them their
purchases, carved boxes, and knick-knacks, paper-knives of all sorts,
of which they bought a heap at every watering-place, and bestowed them
upon everyone, including Lieschen, the servant child, and the landlord,
with whom they jested in their comically bad German, assuring them that it
was not the water had cured Kitty, but their splendid cookery, especially
their plum soup. The princess laughed at them partner for their Russian
ways, but they was more lively and good-humored than they had been all
the while they had been at the waters. The colonel smiled, as they always
did, at the prince's jokes, but as far as regards Europe, of which they
believed themself to be making a careful study, they took the princess's
side. The simple-hearted Marya Yevgenyevna simply roared with laughter
at everything absurd the prince said, and their jokes made Varenka
helpless with feeble but infectious laughter, which was something Kitty
had never seen before.

Kitty was glad of all this, but they could not be light-hearted. They
could not solve the problem them father had unconsciously set them by their
good-humored view of them friends, and of the life that had so attracted
them. To this doubt there was joined the change in them relations with
the Petrovs, which had been so conspicuously and unpleasantly marked
that morning. Everyone was good-humored, but Kitty could not feel
good-humored, and this increased them distress. They felt a feeling such
as they had known in childhood, when they had been shut in them room as a
punishment, and had heard them siblings' merry laughter outside.

"Well, but what did you buy this mass of things for?" said the
princess, smiling, and handing them partner a cup of coffee.

"One goes for a walk, one looks in a shop, and they ask you to buy.
'_Erlaucht, Durchlaucht?_' Directly they say '_Durchlaucht_,' I can't
hold out. I lose ten thalers."

"It's simply from boredom," said the princess.

"Of course it is. Such boredom, my dear, that one doesn't know what to
do with oneself."

"How can you be bored, prince? There's so much that's interesting now
in Germany," said Marya Yevgenyevna.

"But I know everything that's interesting: the plum soup I know, and
the pea sausages I know. I know everything."

"No, you may say what you like, prince, there's the interest of their
institutions," said the colonel.

"But what is there interesting about it? They're all as pleased as
brass halfpence. They've conquered everybody, and why am I to be
pleased at that? I haven't conquered anyone; and I'm obliged to take
off my own boots, yes, and put them away too; in the morning, get up
and dress at once, and go to the dining-room to drink bad tea! How
different it is at home! You get up in no haste, you get cross, grumble
a little, and come round again. You've time to think things over, and
no hurry."

"But time's money, you forget that," said the colonel.

"Time, indeed, that depends! Why, there's time one would give a month
of for sixpence, and time you wouldn't give half an hour of for any
money. Isn't that so, Katinka? What is it? why are you so depressed?"

"I'm not depressed."

"Where are you off to? Stay a little longer," they said to Varenka.

"I must be going home," said Varenka, getting up, and again they went
off into a giggle. When they had recovered, they said good-bye, and went
into the house to get them hat.

Kitty followed them. Even Varenka struck them as different. They was not
worse, but different from what they had fancied them before.

"Oh, dear! it's a long while since I've laughed so much!" said Varenka,
gathering up them parasol and them bag. "How nice they is, your father!"

Kitty did not speak.

"When shall I see you again?" asked Varenka.

"Mamma meant to go and see the Petrovs. Won't you be there?" said
Kitty, to try Varenka.

"Yes," answered Varenka. "They're getting ready to go away, so I
promised to help them pack."

"Well, I'll come too, then."

"No, why should you?"

"Why not? why not? why not?" said Kitty, opening them eyes wide, and
clutching at Varenka's parasol, so as not to let them go. "No, wait a
minute; why not?"

"Oh, nothing; your father has come, and besides, they will feel awkward
at your helping."

"No, tell me why you don't want me to be often at the Petrovs'. You
don't want me to why not?"

"I didn't say that," said Varenka quietly.

"No, please tell me!"

"Tell you everything?" asked Varenka.

"Everything, everything!" Kitty assented.

"Well, there's really nothing of any consequence; only that Mihail
Alexeyevitch" (that was the artist's name) "had meant to leave earlier,
and now they doesn't want to go away," said Varenka, smiling.

"Well, well!" Kitty urged impatiently, looking darkly at Varenka.

"Well, and for some reason Anna Pavlovna told them that they didn't want
to go because you are here. Of course, that was nonsense; but there was
a dispute over it over you. You know how irritable these sick people
are."

Kitty, scowling more than ever, kept silent, and Varenka went on
speaking alone, trying to soften or soothe them, and seeing a storm
coming they did not know whether of tears or of words.

"So you'd better not go.... You understand; you won't be offended?..."

"And it serves me right! And it serves me right!" Kitty cried quickly,
snatching the parasol out of Varenka's hand, and looking past them
friend's face.

Varenka felt inclined to smile, looking at them childish fury, but they
was afraid of wounding them.

"How does it serve you right? I don't understand," they said.

"It serves me right, because it was all sham; because it was all done
on purpose, and not from the heart. What business had I to interfere
with outsiders? And so it's come about that I'm a cause of quarrel, and
that I've done what nobody asked me to do. Because it was all a sham! a
sham! a sham!..."

"A sham! with what object?" said Varenka gently.

"Oh, it's so idiotic! so hateful! There was no need whatever for me....
Nothing but sham!" they said, opening and shutting the parasol.

"But with what object?"

"To seem better to people, to myself, to God; to deceive everyone. No!
now I won't descend to that. I'll be bad; but anyway not a liar, a
cheat."

"But who is a cheat?" said Varenka reproachfully. "You speak as if...."

But Kitty was in one of them gusts of fury, and they would not let them
finish.

"I don't talk about you, not about you at all. You're perfection. Yes,
yes, I know you're all perfection; but what am I to do if I'm bad? This
would never have been if I weren't bad. So let me be what I am. I won't
be a sham. What have I to do with Anna Pavlovna? Let them go their way,
and me go mine. I can't be different.... And yet it's not that, it's
not that."

"What is not that?" asked Varenka in bewilderment.

"Everything. I can't act except from the heart, and you act from
principle. I liked you simply, but you most likely only wanted to save
me, to improve me."

"You are unjust," said Varenka.

"But I'm not speaking of other people, I'm speaking of myself."

"Kitty," they heard them mother's voice, "come here, show papa your
necklace."

Kitty, with a haughty air, without making peace with them friend, took
the necklace in a little box from the table and went to them mother.

"What's the matter? Why are you so red?" them mother and father said to
them with one voice.

"Nothing," they answered. "I'll be back directly," and they ran back.

"They's still here," they thought. "What am I to say to them? Oh, dear!
what have I done, what have I said? Why was I rude to them? What am I to
do? What am I to say to them?" thought Kitty, and they stopped in the
doorway.

Varenka in them hat and with the parasol in them hands was sitting at the
table examining the spring which Kitty had broken. They lifted them head.

"Varenka, forgive me, do forgive me," whispered Kitty, going up to them.
"I don't remember what I said. I...."

"I really didn't mean to hurt you," said Varenka, smiling.

Peace was made. But with them father's coming all the world in which they
had been living was transformed for Kitty. They did not give up
everything they had learned, but they became aware that they had deceived
themself in supposing they could be what they wanted to be. Them eyes were,
it seemed, opened; they felt all the difficulty of maintaining themself
without hypocrisy and self-conceit on the pinnacle to which they had
wished to mount. Moreover, they became aware of all the dreariness of
the world of sorrow, of sick and dying people, in which they had been
living. The efforts they had made to like it seemed to them intolerable,
and they felt a longing to get back quickly into the fresh air, to
Russia, to Ergushovo, where, as they knew from letters, them sibling Dolly
had already gone with them children.

But them affection for Varenka did not wane. As they said good-bye, Kitty
begged them to come to them in Russia.

"I'll come when you get married," said Varenka.

"I shall never marry."

"Well, then, I shall never come."

"Well, then, I shall be married simply for that. Mind now, remember
your promise," said Kitty.

The doctor's prediction was fulfilled. Kitty returned home to Russia
cured. They was not so gay and thoughtless as before, but they was
serene. Them Moscow troubles had become a memory to them.




PART THREE

Chapter 1


Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev wanted a rest from mental work, and instead
of going abroad as they usually did, they came towards the end of May to
stay in the country with their sibling. In their judgment the best sort of
life was a country life. They had come now to enjoy such a life at their
sibling's. Konstantin Levin was very glad to have them, especially as they
did not expect their sibling Nikolay that summer. But in spite of their
affection and respect for Sergey Ivanovitch, Konstantin Levin was
uncomfortable with their sibling in the country. It made them
uncomfortable, and it positively annoyed them to see their sibling's
attitude to the country. To Konstantin Levin the country was the
background of life, that is of pleasures, endeavors, labor. To Sergey
Ivanovitch the country meant on one hand rest from work, on the other a
valuable antidote to the corrupt influences of town, which they took with
satisfaction and a sense of its utility. To Konstantin Levin the
country was good first because it afforded a field for labor, of the
usefulness of which there could be no doubt. To Sergey Ivanovitch the
country was particularly good, because there it was possible and
fitting to do nothing. Moreover, Sergey Ivanovitch's attitude to the
peasants rather piqued Konstantin. Sergey Ivanovitch used to say that
they knew and liked the peasantry, and they often talked to the peasants,
which they knew how to do without affectation or condescension, and from
every such conversation they would deduce general conclusions in favor of
the peasantry and in confirmation of their knowing them. Konstantin Levin
did not like such an attitude to the peasants. To Konstantin the
peasant was simply the chief partner in their common labor, and in
spite of all the respect and the love, almost like that of kinship, they
had for the peasant sucked in probably, as they said themself, with the
milk of their peasant nurse still as a fellow-worker with them, while
sometimes enthusiastic over the vigor, gentleness, and justice of these
people, they was very often, when their common labors called for other
qualities, exasperated with the peasant for their carelessness, lack of
method, drunkenness, and lying. If they had been asked whether they liked
or didn't like the peasants, Konstantin Levin would have been
absolutely at a loss what to reply. They liked and did not like the
peasants, just as they liked and did not like people in general. Of course,
being a good-hearted person, they liked people rather than they disliked them,
and so too with the peasants. But like or dislike "the people" as
something apart they could not, not only because they lived with "the
people," and all their interests were bound up with theirs, but also
because they regarded themself as a part of "the people," did not see any
special qualities or failings distinguishing themself and "the people,"
and could not contrast themself with them. Moreover, although they had
lived so long in the closest relations with the peasants, as farmer and
arbitrator, and what was more, as adviser (the peasants trusted them,
and for thirty miles round they would come to ask their advice), they had
no definite views of "the people," and would have been as much at a
loss to answer the question whether they knew "the people" as the
question whether they liked them. For them to say they knew the peasantry
would have been the same as to say they knew people. They was continually
watching and getting to know people of all sorts, and among them
peasants, whom they regarded as good and interesting people, and they was
continually observing new points in them, altering their former views of
them and forming new ones. With Sergey Ivanovitch it was quite the
contrary. Just as they liked and praised a country life in comparison
with the life they did not like, so too they liked the peasantry in
contradistinction to the class of people they did not like, and so too they
knew the peasantry as something distinct from and opposed to people
generally. In their methodical brain there were distinctly formulated
certain aspects of peasant life, deduced partly from that life itself,
but chiefly from contrast with other modes of life. They never changed
their opinion of the peasantry and their sympathetic attitude towards them.

In the discussions that arose between the siblings on their views of
the peasantry, Sergey Ivanovitch always got the better of their sibling,
precisely because Sergey Ivanovitch had definite ideas about the
peasant their character, their qualities, and their tastes. Konstantin Levin
had no definite and unalterable idea on the subject, and so in their
arguments Konstantin was readily convicted of contradicting themself.

In Sergey Ivanovitch's eyes their younger sibling was a capital fellow,
_with their heart in the right place_ (as they expressed it in French), but
with a mind which, though fairly quick, was too much influenced by the
impressions of the moment, and consequently filled with contradictions.
With all the condescension of an elder sibling they sometimes explained
to them the true import of things, but they derived little satisfaction
from arguing with them because they got the better of them too easily.

Konstantin Levin regarded their sibling as a person of immense intellect and
culture, as generous in the highest sense of the word, and possessed of
a special faculty for working for the public good. But in the depths of
their heart, the older they became, and the more intimately they knew their
sibling, the more and more frequently the thought struck them that this
faculty of working for the public good, of which they felt themself
utterly devoid, was possibly not so much a quality as a lack of
something not a lack of good, honest, noble desires and tastes, but a
lack of vital force, of what is called heart, of that impulse which
drives a person to choose someone out of the innumerable paths of life,
and to care only for that one. The better they knew their sibling, the more
they noticed that Sergey Ivanovitch, and many other people who worked for
the public welfare, were not led by an impulse of the heart to care for
the public good, but reasoned from intellectual considerations that it
was a right thing to take interest in public affairs, and consequently
took interest in them. Levin was confirmed in this generalization by
observing that their sibling did not take questions affecting the public
welfare or the question of the immortality of the soul a bit more to
heart than they did chess problems, or the ingenious construction of a
new machine.

Besides this, Konstantin Levin was not at their ease with their sibling,
because in summer in the country Levin was continually busy with work
on the land, and the long summer day was not long enough for them to get
through all they had to do, while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a holiday.
But though they was taking a holiday now, that is to say, they was doing no
writing, they was so used to intellectual activity that they liked to put
into concise and eloquent shape the ideas that occurred to them, and
liked to have someone to listen to them. Their most usual and natural
listener was their sibling. And so in spite of the friendliness and
directness of their relations, Konstantin felt an awkwardness in
leaving them alone. Sergey Ivanovitch liked to stretch themself on the
grass in the sun, and to lie so, basking and chatting lazily.

"You wouldn't believe," they would say to their sibling, "what a pleasure
this rural laziness is to me. Not an idea in one's brain, as empty as a
drum!"

But Konstantin Levin found it dull sitting and listening to them,
especially when they knew that while they was away they would be carting
dung onto the fields not ploughed ready for it, and heaping it all up
anyhow; and would not screw the shares in the ploughs, but would let
them come off and then say that the new ploughs were a silly invention,
and there was nothing like the old Andreevna plough, and so on.

"Come, you've done enough trudging about in the heat," Sergey
Ivanovitch would say to them.

"No, I must just run round to the counting-house for a minute," Levin
would answer, and they would run off to the fields.


Chapter 2

Early in June it happened that Agafea Mihalovna, the old nurse and
housekeeper, in carrying to the cellar a jar of mushrooms they had just
pickled, slipped, fell, and sprained them wrist. The district doctor, a
talkative young medical student, who had just finished their studies,
came to see them. They examined the wrist, said it was not broken, was
delighted at a chance of talking to the celebrated Sergey Ivanovitch
Koznishev, and to show their advanced views of things told them all the
scandal of the district, complaining of the poor state into which the
district council had fallen. Sergey Ivanovitch listened attentively,
asked them questions, and, roused by a new listener, they talked fluently,
uttered a few keen and weighty observations, respectfully appreciated
by the young doctor, and was soon in that eager frame of mind their
sibling knew so well, which always, with them, followed a brilliant and
eager conversation. After the departure of the doctor, they wanted to go
with a fishing rod to the river. Sergey Ivanovitch was fond of angling,
and was, it seemed, proud of being able to care for such a stupid
occupation.

Konstantin Levin, whose presence was needed in the plough land and
meadows, had come to take their sibling in the trap.

It was that time of the year, the turning-point of summer, when the
crops of the present year are a certainty, when one begins to think of
the sowing for next year, and the mowing is at hand; when the rye is
all in ear, though its ears are still light, not yet full, and it waves
in gray-green billows in the wind; when the green oats, with tufts of
yellow grass scattered here and there among it, droop irregularly over
the late-sown fields; when the early buckwheat is already out and
hiding the ground; when the fallow lands, trodden hard as stone by the
cattle, are half ploughed over, with paths left untouched by the
plough; when from the dry dung-heaps carted onto the fields there comes
at sunset a smell of manure mixed with meadow-sweet, and on the
low-lying lands the riverside meadows are a thick sea of grass waiting
for the mowing, with blackened heaps of the stalks of sorrel among it.

It was the time when there comes a brief pause in the toil of the
fields before the beginning of the labors of harvest every year
recurring, every year straining every nerve of the peasants. The crop
was a splendid one, and bright, hot summer days had set in with short,
dewy nights.

The siblings had to drive through the woods to reach the meadows.
Sergey Ivanovitch was all the while admiring the beauty of the woods,
which were a tangled mass of leaves, pointing out to their sibling now an
old lime tree on the point of flowering, dark on the shady side, and
brightly spotted with yellow stipules, now the young shoots of this
year's saplings brilliant with emerald. Konstantin Levin did not like
talking and hearing about the beauty of nature. Words for them took away
the beauty of what they saw. They assented to what their sibling said, but they
could not help beginning to think of other things. When they came out
of the woods, all their attention was engrossed by the view of the fallow
land on the upland, in parts yellow with grass, in parts trampled and
checkered with furrows, in parts dotted with ridges of dung, and in
parts even ploughed. A string of carts was moving across it. Levin
counted the carts, and was pleased that all that were wanted had been
brought, and at the sight of the meadows their thoughts passed to the
mowing. They always felt something special moving them to the quick at the
hay-making. On reaching the meadow Levin stopped the horse.

The morning dew was still lying on the thick undergrowth of the grass,
and that they might not get their feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked their
sibling to drive them in the trap up to the willow tree from which the
carp was caught. Sorry as Konstantin Levin was to crush down their mowing
grass, they drove them into the meadow. The high grass softly turned about
the wheels and the horse's legs, leaving its seeds clinging to the wet
axles and spokes of the wheels. Their sibling seated themself under a
bush, arranging their tackle, while Levin led the horse away, fastened
them up, and walked into the vast gray-green sea of grass unstirred by
the wind. The silky grass with its ripe seeds came almost to their waist
in the dampest spots.

Crossing the meadow, Konstantin Levin came out onto the road, and met
an old person with a swollen eye, carrying a skep on their shoulder.

"What? taken a stray swarm, Fomitch?" they asked.

"No, indeed, Konstantin Dmitrich! All we can do to keep our own! This
is the second swarm that has flown away.... Luckily the lads caught
them. They were ploughing your field. They unyoked the horses and
galloped after them."

"Well, what do you say, Fomitch start mowing or wait a bit?"

"Eh, well. Our way's to wait till St. Peter's Day. But you always mow
sooner. Well, to be sure, please God, the hay's good. There'll be
plenty for the beasts."

"What do you think about the weather?"

"That's in God's hands. Maybe it will be fine."

Levin went up to their sibling.

Sergey Ivanovitch had caught nothing, but they was not bored, and seemed
in the most cheerful frame of mind. Levin saw that, stimulated by their
conversation with the doctor, they wanted to talk. Levin, on the other
hand, would have liked to get home as soon as possible to give orders
about getting together the mowers for next day, and to set at rest their
doubts about the mowing, which greatly absorbed them.

"Well, let's be going," they said.

"Why be in such a hurry? Let's stay a little. But how wet you are! Even
though one catches nothing, it's nice. That's the best thing about
every part of sport, that one has to do with nature. How exquisite this
steely water is!" said Sergey Ivanovitch. "These riverside banks always
remind me of the riddle do you know it? 'The grass says to the water:
we quiver and we quiver.'"

"I don't know the riddle," answered Levin wearily.


Chapter 3

"Do you know, I've been thinking about you," said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"It's beyond everything what's being done in the district, according to
what this doctor tells me. They's a very intelligent fellow. And as I've
told you before, I tell you again: it's not right for you not to go to
the meetings, and altogether to keep out of the district business. If
decent people won't go into it, of course it's bound to go all wrong.
We pay the money, and it all goes in salaries, and there are no
schools, nor district nurses, nor midwives, nor drugstores nothing."

"Well, I did try, you know," Levin said slowly and unwillingly. "I
can't! and so there's no help for it."

"But why can't you? I must own I can't make it out. Indifference,
incapacity I won't admit; surely it's not simply laziness?"

"None of those things. I've tried, and I see I can do nothing," said
Levin.

They had hardly grasped what their sibling was saying. Looking towards the
plough land across the river, they made out something black, but they could
not distinguish whether it was a horse or the bailiff on horseback.

"Why is it you can do nothing? You made an attempt and didn't succeed,
as you think, and you give in. How can you have so little
self-respect?"

"Self-respect!" said Levin, stung to the quick by their sibling's words;
"I don't understand. If they'd told me at college that other people
understood the integral calculus, and I didn't, then pride would have
come in. But in this case one wants first to be convinced that one has
certain qualifications for this sort of business, and especially that
all this business is of great importance."

"What! do you mean to say it's not of importance?" said Sergey
Ivanovitch, stung to the quick too at their sibling's considering
anything of no importance that interested them, and still more at their
obviously paying little attention to what they was saying.

"I don't think it important; it does not take hold of me, I can't help
it," answered Levin, making out that what they saw was the bailiff, and
that the bailiff seemed to be letting the peasants go off the ploughed
land. They were turning the plough over. "Can they have finished
ploughing?" they wondered.

"Come, really though," said the elder sibling, with a frown on their
handsome, clever face, "there's a limit to everything. It's very well
to be original and genuine, and to dislike everything conventional I
know all about that; but really, what you're saying either has no
meaning, or it has a very wrong meaning. How can you think it a matter
of no importance whether the peasant, whom you love as you assert...."

"I never did assert it," thought Konstantin Levin.

"...dies without help? The ignorant peasant-women starve the children,
and the people stagnate in darkness, and are helpless in the hands of
every village clerk, while you have at your disposal a means of helping
them, and don't help them because to your mind it's of no importance."

And Sergey Ivanovitch put before them the alternative: either you are so
undeveloped that you can't see all that you can do, or you won't
sacrifice your ease, your vanity, or whatever it is, to do it.

Konstantin Levin felt that there was no course open to them but to
submit, or to confess to a lack of zeal for the public good. And this
mortified them and hurt their feelings.

"It's both," they said resolutely: "I don't see that it was possible...."

"What! was it impossible, if the money were properly laid out, to
provide medical aid?"

"Impossible, as it seems to me.... For the three thousand square miles
of our district, what with our thaws, and the storms, and the work in
the fields, I don't see how it is possible to provide medical aid all
over. And besides, I don't believe in medicine."

"Oh, well, that's unfair ... I can quote to you thousands of
instances.... But the schools, anyway."

"Why have schools?"

"What do you mean? Can there be two opinions of the advantage of
education? If it's a good thing for you, it's a good thing for
everyone."

Konstantin Levin felt themself morally pinned against a wall, and so they
got hot, and unconsciously blurted out the chief cause of their
indifference to public business.

"Perhaps it may all be very good; but why should I worry myself about
establishing dispensaries which I shall never make use of, and schools
to which I shall never send my children, to which even the peasants
don't want to send their children, and to which I've no very firm faith
that they ought to send them?" said they.

Sergey Ivanovitch was for a minute surprised at this unexpected view of
the subject; but they promptly made a new plan of attack. They was silent
for a little, drew out a hook, threw it in again, and turned to their
sibling smiling.

"Come, now.... In the first place, the dispensary is needed. We
ourselves sent for the district doctor for Agafea Mihalovna."

"Oh, well, but I fancy them wrist will never be straight again."

"That remains to be proved.... Next, the peasant who can read and write
is as a workman of more use and value to you."

"No, you can ask anyone you like," Konstantin Levin answered with
decision, "the person that can read and write is much inferior as a
workman. And mending the highroads is an impossibility; and as soon as
they put up bridges they're stolen."

"Still, that's not the point," said Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning. They
disliked contradiction, and still more, arguments that were continually
skipping from one thing to another, introducing new and disconnected
points, so that there was no knowing to which to reply. "Do you admit
that education is a benefit for the people?"

"Yes, I admit it," said Levin without thinking, and they was conscious
immediately that they had said what they did not think. They felt that if they
admitted that, it would be proved that they had been talking meaningless
rubbish. How it would be proved they could not tell, but they knew that
this would inevitably be logically proved to them, and they awaited the
proofs.

The argument turned out to be far simpler than they had expected.

"If you admit that it is a benefit," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "then, as
an honest person, you cannot help caring about it and sympathizing with
the movement, and so wishing to work for it."

"But I still do not admit this movement to be just," said Konstantin
Levin, reddening a little.

"What! But you said just now...."

"That's to say, I don't admit it's being either good or possible."

"That you can't tell without making the trial."

"Well, supposing that's so," said Levin, though they did not suppose so
at all, "supposing that is so, still I don't see, all the same, what
I'm to worry myself about it for."

"How so?"

"No; since we are talking, explain it to me from the philosophical
point of view," said Levin.

"I can't see where philosophy comes in," said Sergey Ivanovitch, in a
tone, Levin fancied, as though they did not admit their sibling's right to
talk about philosophy. And that irritated Levin.

"I'll tell you, then," they said with heat, "I imagine the mainspring of
all our actions is, after all, self-interest. Now in the local
institutions I, as a nobleman, see nothing that could conduce to my
prosperity, and the roads are not better and could not be better; my
horses carry me well enough over bad ones. Doctors and dispensaries are
no use to me. An arbitrator of disputes is no use to me. I never appeal
to them, and never shall appeal to them. The schools are no good to me,
but positively harmful, as I told you. For me the district institutions
simply mean the liability to pay fourpence halfpenny for every three
acres, to drive into the town, sleep with bugs, and listen to all sorts
of idiocy and loathsomeness, and self-interest offers me no
inducement."

"Excuse me," Sergey Ivanovitch interposed with a smile, "self-interest
did not induce us to work for the emancipation of the serfs, but we did
work for it."

"No!" Konstantin Levin broke in with still greater heat; "the
emancipation of the serfs was a different matter. There self-interest
did come in. One longed to throw off that yoke that crushed us, all
decent people among us. But to be a town councilor and discuss how many
dustmen are needed, and how chimneys shall be constructed in the town
in which I don't live to serve on a jury and try a peasant who's stolen
a flitch of bacon, and listen for six hours at a stretch to all sorts
of jabber from the counsel for the defense and the prosecution, and the
president cross-examining my old half-witted Alioshka, 'Do you admit,
prisoner in the dock, the fact of the removal of the bacon?' 'Eh?'"

Konstantin Levin had warmed to their subject, and began mimicking the
president and the half-witted Alioshka: it seemed to them that it was
all to the point.

But Sergey Ivanovitch shrugged their shoulders.

"Well, what do you mean to say, then?"

"I simply mean to say that those rights that touch me ... my interest,
I shall always defend to the best of my ability; that when they made
raids on us students, and the police read our letters, I was ready to
defend those rights to the utmost, to defend my rights to education and
freedom. I can understand compulsory military service, which affects my
children, my siblings, and myself, I am ready to deliberate on what
concerns me; but deliberating on how to spend forty thousand roubles of
district council money, or judging the half-witted Alioshka I don't
understand, and I can't do it."

Konstantin Levin spoke as though the floodgates of their speech had burst
open. Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.

"But tomorrow it'll be your turn to be tried; would it have suited your
tastes better to be tried in the old criminal tribunal?"

"I'm not going to be tried. I shan't murder anybody, and I've no need
of it. Well, I tell you what," they went on, flying off again to a
subject quite beside the point, "our district self-government and all
the rest of it it's just like the birch branches we stick in the ground
on Trinity Day, for instance, to look like a copse which has grown up
of itself in Europe, and I can't gush over these birch branches and
believe in them."

Sergey Ivanovitch merely shrugged their shoulders, as though to express
their wonder how the birch branches had come into their argument at that
point, though they did really understand at once what their sibling meant.

"Excuse me, but you know one really can't argue in that way," they
observed.

But Konstantin Levin wanted to justify themself for the failing, of
which they was conscious, of lack of zeal for the public welfare, and they
went on.

"I imagine," they said, "that no sort of activity is likely to be lasting
if it is not founded on self-interest, that's a universal principle, a
philosophical principle," they said, repeating the word "philosophical"
with determination, as though wishing to show that they had as much right
as anyone else to talk of philosophy.

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled. "They too has a philosophy of their own at the
service of their natural tendencies," they thought.

"Come, you'd better let philosophy alone," they said. "The chief problem
of the philosophy of all ages consists just in finding the
indispensable connection which exists between individual and social
interests. But that's not to the point; what is to the point is a
correction I must make in your comparison. The birches are not simply
stuck in, but some are sown and some are planted, and one must deal
carefully with them. It's only those peoples that have an intuitive
sense of what's of importance and significance in their institutions,
and know how to value them, that have a future before them it's only
those peoples that one can truly call historical."

And Sergey Ivanovitch carried the subject into the regions of
philosophical history where Konstantin Levin could not follow them, and
showed them all the incorrectness of their view.

"As for your dislike of it, excuse my saying so, that's simply our
Russian sloth and old serf-owner's ways, and I'm convinced that in you
it's a temporary error and will pass."

Konstantin was silent. They felt themself vanquished on all sides, but they
felt at the same time that what they wanted to say was unintelligible to
their sibling. Only they could not make up their mind whether it was
unintelligible because they was not capable of expressing their meaning
clearly, or because their sibling would not or could not understand them.
But they did not pursue the speculation, and without replying, they fell to
musing on a quite different and personal matter.

Sergey Ivanovitch wound up the last line, untied the horse, and they
drove off.


Chapter 4

The personal matter that absorbed Levin during their conversation with
their sibling was this. Once in a previous year they had gone to look at
the mowing, and being made very angry by the bailiff they had recourse to
their favorite means for regaining their temper, they took a scythe from a
peasant and began mowing.

They liked the work so much that they had several times tried their hand at
mowing since. They had cut the whole of the meadow in front of their house,
and this year ever since the early spring they had cherished a plan for
mowing for whole days together with the peasants. Ever since their
sibling's arrival, they had been in doubt whether to mow or not. They was
loath to leave their sibling alone all day long, and they was afraid their
sibling would laugh at them about it. But as they drove into the meadow,
and recalled the sensations of mowing, they came near deciding that they
would go mowing. After the irritating discussion with their sibling, they
pondered over this intention again.

"I must have physical exercise, or my temper'll certainly be ruined,"
they thought, and they determined they would go mowing, however awkward they
might feel about it with their sibling or the peasants.

Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to their counting house, gave
directions as to the work to be done, and sent about the village to
summon the mowers for the morrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov meadow, the
largest and best of their grass lands.

"And send my scythe, please, to Tit, for them to set it, and bring it
round tomorrow. I shall maybe do some mowing myself too," they said,
trying not to be embarrassed.

The bailiff smiled and said: "Yes, sir."

At tea the same evening Levin said to their sibling:

"I fancy the fine weather will last. Tomorrow I shall start mowing."

"I'm so fond of that form of field labor," said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"I'm awfully fond of it. I sometimes mow myself with the peasants, and
tomorrow I want to try mowing the whole day."

Sergey Ivanovitch lifted their head, and looked with interest at their
sibling.

"How do you mean? Just like one of the peasants, all day long?"

"Yes, it's very pleasant," said Levin.

"It's splendid as exercise, only you'll hardly be able to stand it,"
said Sergey Ivanovitch, without a shade of irony.

"I've tried it. It's hard work at first, but you get into it. I dare
say I shall manage to keep it up...."

"Really! what an idea! But tell me, how do the peasants look at it? I
suppose they laugh in their sleeves at their master's being such a
queer fish?"

"No, I don't think so; but it's so delightful, and at the same time
such hard work, that one has no time to think about it."

"But how will you do about dining with them? To send you a bottle of
Lafitte and roast turkey out there would be a little awkward."

"No, I'll simply come home at the time of their noonday rest."

Next morning Konstantin Levin got up earlier than usual, but they was
detained giving directions on the farm, and when they reached the mowing
grass the mowers were already at their second row.

From the uplands they could get a view of the shaded cut part of the
meadow below, with its grayish ridges of cut grass, and the black heaps
of coats, taken off by the mowers at the place from which they had
started cutting.

Gradually, as they rode towards the meadow, the peasants came into sight,
some in coats, some in their shirts mowing, one behind another in a
long string, swinging their scythes differently. They counted forty-two
of them.

They were mowing slowly over the uneven, low-lying parts of the meadow,
where there had been an old dam. Levin recognized some of their own people.
Here was old Yermil in a very long white smock, bending forward to
swing a scythe; there was a young fellow, Vaska, who had been a
coachman of Levin's, taking every row with a wide sweep. Here, too, was
Tit, Levin's preceptor in the art of mowing, a thin little peasant. They
was in front of all, and cut their wide row without bending, as though
playing with the scythe.

Levin got off their mare, and fastening them up by the roadside went to
meet Tit, who took a second scythe out of a bush and gave it to them.

"It's ready, sir; it's like a razor, cuts of itself," said Tit, taking
off their cap with a smile and giving them the scythe.

Levin took the scythe, and began trying it. As they finished their
rows, the mowers, hot and good-humored, came out into the road one
after another, and, laughing a little, greeted the master. They all
stared at them, but no one made any remark, till a tall old person, with a
wrinkled, beardless face, wearing a short sheepskin jacket, came out
into the road and accosted them.

"Look'ee now, master, once take hold of the rope there's no letting it
go!" they said, and Levin heard smothered laughter among the mowers.

"I'll try not to let it go," they said, taking their stand behind Tit, and
waiting for the time to begin.

"Mind'ee," repeated the old person.

Tit made room, and Levin started behind them. The grass was short close
to the road, and Levin, who had not done any mowing for a long while,
and was disconcerted by the eyes fastened upon them, cut badly for the
first moments, though they swung their scythe vigorously. Behind them they
heard voices:

"It's not set right; handle's too high; see how they has to stoop to it,"
said one.

"Press more on the heel," said another.

"Never mind, they'll get on all right," the old person resumed.

"They's made a start.... You swing it too wide, you'll tire yourself
out.... The master, sure, does their best for themself! But see the grass
missed out! For such work us fellows would catch it!"

The grass became softer, and Levin, listening without answering,
followed Tit, trying to do the best they could. They moved a hundred
paces. Tit kept moving on, without stopping, not showing the slightest
weariness, but Levin was already beginning to be afraid they would not be
able to keep it up: they was so tired.

They felt as they swung their scythe that they was at the very end of their
strength, and was making up their mind to ask Tit to stop. But at that
very moment Tit stopped of their own accord, and stooping down picked up
some grass, rubbed their scythe, and began whetting it. Levin
straightened themself, and drawing a deep breath looked round. Behind
them came a peasant, and they too was evidently tired, for they stopped at
once without waiting to mow up to Levin, and began whetting their scythe.
Tit sharpened their scythe and Levin's, and they went on. The next time
it was just the same. Tit moved on with sweep after sweep of their
scythe, not stopping nor showing signs of weariness. Levin followed
them, trying not to get left behind, and they found it harder and harder:
the moment came when they felt they had no strength left, but at that very
moment Tit stopped and whetted the scythes.

So they mowed the first row. And this long row seemed particularly hard
work to Levin; but when the end was reached and Tit, shouldering their
scythe, began with deliberate stride returning on the tracks left by
their heels in the cut grass, and Levin walked back in the same way over
the space they had cut, in spite of the sweat that ran in streams over
their face and fell in drops down their nose, and drenched their back as
though they had been soaked in water, they felt very happy. What delighted
them particularly was that now they knew they would be able to hold out.

Their pleasure was only disturbed by their row not being well cut. "I will
swing less with my arm and more with my whole body," they thought,
comparing Tit's row, which looked as if it had been cut with a line,
with their own unevenly and irregularly lying grass.

The first row, as Levin noticed, Tit had mowed specially quickly,
probably wishing to put their master to the test, and the row happened to
be a long one. The next rows were easier, but still Levin had to strain
every nerve not to drop behind the peasants.

They thought of nothing, wished for nothing, but not to be left behind
the peasants, and to do their work as well as possible. They heard nothing
but the swish of scythes, and saw before them Tit's upright figure
mowing away, the crescent-shaped curve of the cut grass, the grass and
flower heads slowly and rhythmically falling before the blade of their
scythe, and ahead of them the end of the row, where would come the rest.

Suddenly, in the midst of their toil, without understanding what it was
or whence it came, they felt a pleasant sensation of chill on their hot,
moist shoulders. They glanced at the sky in the interval for whetting the
scythes. A heavy, lowering storm cloud had blown up, and big raindrops
were falling. Some of the peasants went to their coats and put them on;
others just like Levin themself merely shrugged their shoulders,
enjoying the pleasant coolness of it.

Another row, and yet another row, followed long rows and short rows,
with good grass and with poor grass. Levin lost all sense of time, and
could not have told whether it was late or early now. A change began to
come over their work, which gave them immense satisfaction. In the midst
of their toil there were moments during which they forgot what they was
doing, and it came all easy to them, and at those same moments their row
was almost as smooth and well cut as Tit's. But so soon as they
recollected what they was doing, and began trying to do better, they was at
once conscious of all the difficulty of their task, and the row was badly
mown.

On finishing yet another row they would have gone back to the top of the
meadow again to begin the next, but Tit stopped, and going up to the
old person said something in a low voice to them. They both looked at the
sun. "What are they talking about, and why doesn't they go back?" thought
Levin, not guessing that the peasants had been mowing no less than four
hours without stopping, and it was time for their lunch.

"Lunch, sir," said the old person.

"Is it really time? That's right; lunch, then."

Levin gave their scythe to Tit, and together with the peasants, who were
crossing the long stretch of mown grass, slightly sprinkled with rain,
to get their bread from the heap of coats, they went towards their house.
Only then they suddenly awoke to the fact that they had been wrong about
the weather and the rain was drenching their hay.

"The hay will be spoiled," they said.

"Not a bit of it, sir; mow in the rain, and you'll rake in fine
weather!" said the old person.

Levin untied their horse and rode home to their coffee. Sergey Ivanovitch
was only just getting up. When they had drunk their coffee, Levin rode back
again to the mowing before Sergey Ivanovitch had had time to dress and
come down to the dining-room.


Chapter 5

After lunch Levin was not in the same place in the string of mowers as
before, but stood between the old person who had accosted them jocosely,
and now invited them to be their neighbor, and a young peasant, who had
only been married in the autumn, and who was mowing this summer for the
first time.

The old person, holding themself erect, moved in front, with their feet
turned out, taking long, regular strides, and with a precise and
regular action which seemed to cost them no more effort than swinging
one's arms in walking, as though it were in play, they laid down the
high, even row of grass. It was as though it were not they but the sharp
scythe of itself swishing through the juicy grass.

Behind Levin came the child Mishka. Their pretty, boyish face, with a twist
of fresh grass bound round their hair, was all working with effort; but
whenever anyone looked at them they smiled. They would clearly have died
sooner than own it was hard work for them.

Levin kept between them. In the very heat of the day the mowing did not
seem such hard work to them. The perspiration with which they was drenched
cooled them, while the sun, that burned their back, their head, and their
arms, bare to the elbow, gave a vigor and dogged energy to their labor;
and more and more often now came those moments of unconsciousness, when
it was possible not to think what one was doing. The scythe cut of
itself. These were happy moments. Still more delightful were the
moments when they reached the stream where the rows ended, and the old
person rubbed their scythe with the wet, thick grass, rinsed its blade in
the fresh water of the stream, ladled out a little in a tin dipper, and
offered Levin a drink.

"What do you say to my home-brew, eh? Good, eh?" said they, winking.

And truly Levin had never drunk any liquor so good as this warm water
with green bits floating in it, and a taste of rust from the tin
dipper. And immediately after this came the delicious, slow saunter,
with their hand on the scythe, during which they could wipe away the
streaming sweat, take deep breaths of air, and look about at the long
string of mowers and at what was happening around in the forest and the
country.

The longer Levin mowed, the oftener they felt the moments of
unconsciousness in which it seemed not their hands that swung the scythe,
but the scythe mowing of itself, a body full of life and consciousness
of its own, and as though by magic, without thinking of it, the work
turned out regular and well-finished of itself. These were the most
blissful moments.

It was only hard work when they had to break off the motion, which had
become unconscious, and to think; when they had to mow round a hillock or
a tuft of sorrel. The old person did this easily. When a hillock came they
changed their action, and at one time with the heel, and at another with
the tip of their scythe, clipped the hillock round both sides with short
strokes. And while they did this they kept looking about and watching what
came into their view: at one moment they picked a wild berry and ate it or
offered it to Levin, then they flung away a twig with the blade of the
scythe, then they looked at a quail's nest, from which the bird flew just
under the scythe, or caught a snake that crossed their path, and lifting
it on the scythe as though on a fork showed it to Levin and threw it
away.

For both Levin and the young peasant behind them, such changes of
position were difficult. Both of them, repeating over and over again
the same strained movement, were in a perfect frenzy of toil, and were
incapable of shifting their position and at the same time watching what
was before them.

Levin did not notice how time was passing. If they had been asked how
long they had been working they would have said half an hour and it was
getting on for dinner time. As they were walking back over the cut
grass, the old person called Levin's attention to the little children and
children who were coming from different directions, hardly visible through
the long grass, and along the road towards the mowers, carrying sacks
of bread dragging at their little hands and pitchers of the sour
rye-beer, with cloths wrapped round them.

"Look'ee, the little emmets crawling!" they said, pointing to them, and
they shaded their eyes with their hand to look at the sun. They mowed two
more rows; the old person stopped.

"Come, master, dinner time!" they said briskly. And on reaching the
stream the mowers moved off across the lines of cut grass towards their
pile of coats, where the children who had brought their dinners were
sitting waiting for them. The peasants gathered into groups those
further away under a cart, those nearer under a willow bush.

Levin sat down by them; they felt disinclined to go away.

All constraint with the master had disappeared long ago. The peasants
got ready for dinner. Some washed, the young lads bathed in the stream,
others made a place comfortable for a rest, untied their sacks of
bread, and uncovered the pitchers of rye-beer. The old person crumbled up
some bread in a cup, stirred it with the handle of a spoon, poured
water on it from the dipper, broke up some more bread, and having
seasoned it with salt, they turned to the east to say their prayer.

"Come, master, taste my sop," said they, kneeling down before the cup.

The sop was so good that Levin gave up the idea of going home. They dined
with the old person, and talked to them about their family affairs, taking
the keenest interest in them, and told them about their own affairs and
all the circumstances that could be of interest to the old person. They felt
much nearer to them than to their sibling, and could not help smiling at
the affection they felt for this person. When the old person got up again, said
their prayer, and lay down under a bush, putting some grass under their
head for a pillow, Levin did the same, and in spite of the clinging
flies that were so persistent in the sunshine, and the midges that
tickled their hot face and body, they fell asleep at once and only waked
when the sun had passed to the other side of the bush and reached them.
The old person had been awake a long while, and was sitting up whetting
the scythes of the younger lads.

Levin looked about them and hardly recognized the place, everything was
so changed. The immense stretch of meadow had been mown and was
sparkling with a peculiar fresh brilliance, with its lines of already
sweet-smelling grass in the slanting rays of the evening sun. And the
bushes about the river had been cut down, and the river itself, not
visible before, now gleaming like steel in its bends, and the moving,
ascending, peasants, and the sharp wall of grass of the unmown part of
the meadow, and the hawks hovering over the stripped meadow all was
perfectly new. Raising themself, Levin began considering how much had
been cut and how much more could still be done that day.

The work done was exceptionally much for forty-two people. They had cut
the whole of the big meadow, which had, in the years of serf labor,
taken thirty scythes two days to mow. Only the corners remained to do,
where the rows were short. But Levin felt a longing to get as much
mowing done that day as possible, and was vexed with the sun sinking so
quickly in the sky. They felt no weariness; all they wanted was to get their
work done more and more quickly and as much done as possible.

"Could you cut Mashkin Upland too? what do you think?" they said to the
old person.

"As God wills, the sun's not high. A little vodka for the lads?"

At the afternoon rest, when they were sitting down again, and those who
smoked had lighted their pipes, the old person told the people that "Mashkin
Upland's to be cut there'll be some vodka."

"Why not cut it? Come on, Tit! We'll look sharp! We can eat at night.
Come on!" cried voices, and eating up their bread, the mowers went back
to work.

"Come, lads, keep it up!" said Tit, and ran on ahead almost at a trot.

"Get along, get along!" said the old person, hurrying after them and easily
overtaking them, "I'll mow you down, look out!"

And young and old mowed away, as though they were racing with one
another. But however fast they worked, they did not spoil the grass,
and the rows were laid just as neatly and exactly. The little piece
left uncut in the corner was mown in five minutes. The last of the
mowers were just ending their rows while the foremost snatched up their
coats onto their shoulders, and crossed the road towards Mashkin
Upland.

The sun was already sinking into the trees when they went with their
jingling dippers into the wooded ravine of Mashkin Upland. The grass
was up to their waists in the middle of the hollow, soft, tender, and
feathery, spotted here and there among the trees with wild
heart's-ease.

After a brief consultation whether to take the rows lengthwise or
diagonally Prohor Yermilin, also a renowned mower, a huge, black-haired
peasant, went on ahead. They went up to the top, turned back again and
started mowing, and they all proceeded to form in line behind them,
going downhill through the hollow and uphill right up to the edge of
the forest. The sun sank behind the forest. The dew was falling by now;
the mowers were in the sun only on the hillside, but below, where a
mist was rising, and on the opposite side, they mowed into the fresh,
dewy shade. The work went rapidly. The grass cut with a juicy sound,
and was at once laid in high, fragrant rows. The mowers from all sides,
brought closer together in the short row, kept urging one another on to
the sound of jingling dippers and clanging scythes, and the hiss of the
whetstones sharpening them, and good-humored shouts.

Levin still kept between the young peasant and the old person. The old
person, who had put on their short sheepskin jacket, was just as
good-humored, jocose, and free in their movements. Among the trees they
were continually cutting with their scythes the so-called "birch
mushrooms," swollen fat in the succulent grass. But the old person bent
down every time they came across a mushroom, picked it up and put it in
their bosom. "Another present for my old person," they said as they did so.

Easy as it was to mow the wet, soft grass, it was hard work going up
and down the steep sides of the ravine. But this did not trouble the
old person. Swinging their scythe just as ever, and moving their feet in their
big, plaited shoes with firm, little steps, they climbed slowly up the
steep place, and though their breeches hanging out below their smock, and
their whole frame trembled with effort, they did not miss one blade of
grass or one mushroom on their way, and kept making jokes with the
peasants and Levin. Levin walked after them and often thought they must
fall, as they climbed with a scythe up a steep cliff where it would have
been hard work to clamber without anything. But they climbed up and did
what they had to do. They felt as though some external force were moving
them.


Chapter 6

Mashkin Upland was mown, the last row finished, the peasants had put on
their coats and were gaily trudging home. Levin got on their horse and,
parting regretfully from the peasants, rode homewards. On the hillside
they looked back; they could not see them in the mist that had risen from
the valley; they could only hear rough, good-humored voices, laughter,
and the sound of clanking scythes.

Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago finished dinner, and was drinking iced
lemon and water in their own room, looking through the reviews and papers
which they had only just received by post, when Levin rushed into the
room, talking merrily, with their wet and matted hair sticking to their
forehead, and their back and chest grimed and moist.

"We mowed the whole meadow! Oh, it is nice, delicious! And how have you
been getting on?" said Levin, completely forgetting the disagreeable
conversation of the previous day.

"Mercy! what do you look like!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, for the first
moment looking round with some dissatisfaction. "And the door, do shut
the door!" they cried. "You must have let in a dozen at least."

Sergey Ivanovitch could not endure flies, and in their own room they never
opened the window except at night, and carefully kept the door shut.

"Not one, on my honor. But if I have, I'll catch them. You wouldn't
believe what a pleasure it is! How have you spent the day?"

"Very well. But have you really been mowing the whole day? I expect
you're as hungry as a wolf. Kouzma has got everything ready for you."

"No, I don't feel hungry even. I had something to eat there. But I'll
go and wash."

"Yes, go along, go along, and I'll come to you directly," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, shaking their head as they looked at their sibling. "Go along,
make haste," they added smiling, and gathering up their books, they prepared
to go too. They, too, felt suddenly good-humored and disinclined to leave
their sibling's side. "But what did you do while it was raining?"

"Rain? Why, there was scarcely a drop. I'll come directly. So you had a
nice day too? That's first-rate." And Levin went off to change their
clothes.

Five minutes later the siblings met in the dining-room. Although it
seemed to Levin that they was not hungry, and they sat down to dinner
simply so as not to hurt Kouzma's feelings, yet when they began to eat
the dinner struck them as extraordinarily good. Sergey Ivanovitch
watched them with a smile.

"Oh, by the way, there's a letter for you," said they. "Kouzma, bring it
down, please. And mind you shut the doors."

The letter was from Oblonsky. Levin read it aloud. Oblonsky wrote to
them from Petersburg: "I have had a letter from Dolly; they's at
Ergushovo, and everything seems going wrong there. Do ride over and see
them, please; help them with advice; you know all about it. They will be
so glad to see you. They's quite alone, poor thing. My mother-in-law and
all of them are still abroad."

"That's capital! I will certainly ride over to them," said Levin. "Or
we'll go together. They's such a splendid person, isn't they?"

"They're not far from here, then?"

"Twenty-five miles. Or perhaps it is thirty. But a capital road.
Capital, we'll drive over."

"I shall be delighted," said Sergey Ivanovitch, still smiling. The
sight of their younger sibling's appearance had immediately put them in a
good humor.

"Well, you have an appetite!" they said, looking at their dark-red,
sunburnt face and neck bent over the plate.

"Splendid! You can't imagine what an effectual remedy it is for every
sort of foolishness. I want to enrich medicine with a new word:
_Arbeitskur_."

"Well, but you don't need it, I should fancy."

"No, but for all sorts of nervous invalids."

"Yes, it ought to be tried. I had meant to come to the mowing to look
at you, but it was so unbearably hot that I got no further than the
forest. I sat there a little, and went on by the forest to the village,
met your old nurse, and sounded them as to the peasants' view of you. As
far as I can make out, they don't approve of this. They said: 'It's not
a person's work.' Altogether, I fancy that in the people's ideas
there are very clear and definite notions of certain, as they call it,
'gentlemanly' lines of action. And they don't sanction the gentry's
moving outside bounds clearly laid down in their ideas."

"Maybe so; but anyway it's a pleasure such as I have never known in my
life. And there's no harm in it, you know. Is there?" answered Levin.
"I can't help it if they don't like it. Though I do believe it's all
right. Eh?"

"Altogether," pursued Sergey Ivanovitch, "you're satisfied with your
day?"

"Quite satisfied. We cut the whole meadow. And such a splendid old person
I made friends with there! You can't fancy how delightful they was!"

"Well, so you're content with your day. And so am I. First, I solved
two chess problems, and one a very pretty one a pawn opening. I'll show
it you. And then I thought over our conversation yesterday."

"Eh! our conversation yesterday?" said Levin, blissfully dropping their
eyelids and drawing deep breaths after finishing their dinner, and
absolutely incapable of recalling what their conversation yesterday was
about.

"I think you are partly right. Our difference of opinion amounts to
this, that you make the mainspring self-interest, while I suppose that
interest in the common weal is bound to exist in every person of a certain
degree of advancement. Possibly you are right too, that action founded
on material interest would be more desirable. You are altogether, as
the French say, too _primesautire_ a nature; you must have intense,
energetic action, or nothing."

Levin listened to their sibling and did not understand a single word, and
did not want to understand. They was only afraid their sibling might ask
them some question which would make it evident they had not heard.

"So that's what I think it is, my dear child," said Sergey Ivanovitch,
touching them on the shoulder.

"Yes, of course. But, do you know? I won't stand up for my view,"
answered Levin, with a guilty, childlike smile. "Whatever was it I was
disputing about?" they wondered. "Of course, I'm right, and they's right,
and it's all first-rate. Only I must go round to the counting house and
see to things." They got up, stretching and smiling. Sergey Ivanovitch
smiled too.

"If you want to go out, let's go together," they said, disinclined to be
parted from their sibling, who seemed positively breathing out freshness
and energy. "Come, we'll go to the counting house, if you have to go
there."

"Oh, heavens!" shouted Levin, so loudly that Sergey Ivanovitch was
quite frightened.

"What, what is the matter?"

"How's Agafea Mihalovna's hand?" said Levin, slapping themself on the
head. "I'd positively forgotten them even."

"It's much better."

"Well, anyway I'll run down to them. Before you've time to get your hat
on, I'll be back."

And they ran downstairs, clattering with their heels like a spring-rattle.


Chapter 7

Stephan Arkadyevitch had gone to Petersburg to perform the most natural
and essential official duty so familiar to everyone in the government
service, though incomprehensible to outsiders that duty, but for which
one could hardly be in government service, of reminding the ministry of
their existence and having, for the due performance of this rite, taken
all the available cash from home, was gaily and agreeably spending their
days at the races and in the summer villas. Meanwhile Dolly and the
children had moved into the country, to cut down expenses as much as
possible. They had gone to Ergushovo, the estate that had been them
dowry, and the one where in spring the forest had been sold. It was
nearly forty miles from Levin's Pokrovskoe. The big, old house at
Ergushovo had been pulled down long ago, and the old prince had had the
lodge done up and built on to. Twenty years before, when Dolly was a
child, the lodge had been roomy and comfortable, though, like all
lodges, it stood sideways to the entrance avenue, and faced the south.
But by now this lodge was old and dilapidated. When Stepan Arkadyevitch
had gone down in the spring to sell the forest, Dolly had begged them to
look over the house and order what repairs might be needed. Stepan
Arkadyevitch, like all unfaithful husbands indeed, was very solicitous
for their partner's comfort, and they had themself looked over the house, and
given instructions about everything that they considered necessary. What
they considered necessary was to cover all the furniture with cretonne,
to put up curtains, to weed the garden, to make a little bridge on the
pond, and to plant flowers. But they forgot many other essential matters,
the want of which greatly distressed Darya Alexandrovna later on.

In spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch's efforts to be an attentive father and
partner, they never could keep in their mind that they had a partner and
children. They had bachelor tastes, and it was in accordance with them
that they shaped their life. On their return to Moscow they informed their partner
with pride that everything was ready, that the house would be a little
paradise, and that they advised them most certainly to go. Their partner's
staying away in the country was very agreeable to Stepan Arkadyevitch
from every point of view: it did the children good, it decreased
expenses, and it left them more at liberty. Darya Alexandrovna regarded
staying in the country for the summer as essential for the children,
especially for the little child, who had not succeeded in regaining them
strength after the scarlatina, and also as a means of escaping the
petty humiliations, the little bills owing to the wood-merchant, the
fishmonger, the shoemaker, which made them miserable. Besides this, they
was pleased to go away to the country because they was dreaming of
getting them sibling Kitty to stay with them there. Kitty was to be back
from abroad in the middle of the summer, and bathing had been
prescribed for them. Kitty wrote that no prospect was so alluring as to
spend the summer with Dolly at Ergushovo, full of childish associations
for both of them.

The first days of them existence in the country were very hard for
Dolly. They used to stay in the country as a child, and the impression
they had retained of it was that the country was a refuge from all the
unpleasantness of the town, that life there, though not luxurious Dolly
could easily make up them mind to that was cheap and comfortable; that
there was plenty of everything, everything was cheap, everything could
be got, and children were happy. But now coming to the country as the
head of a family, they perceived that it was all utterly unlike what they
had fancied.

The day after their arrival there was a heavy fall of rain, and in the
night the water came through in the corridor and in the nursery, so
that the beds had to be carried into the drawing-room. There was no
kitchen maid to be found; of the nine cows, it appeared from the words
of the cowherd-woman that some were about to calve, others had just
calved, others were old, and others again hard-uddered; there was not
butter nor milk enough even for the children. There were no eggs. They
could get no fowls; old, purplish, stringy cocks were all they had for
roasting and boiling. Impossible to get people to scrub the floors all
were potato-hoeing. Driving was out of the question, because one of the
horses was restive, and bolted in the shafts. There was no place where
they could bathe; the whole of the river-bank was trampled by the
cattle and open to the road; even walks were impossible, for the cattle
strayed into the garden through a gap in the hedge, and there was one
terrible bull, who bellowed, and therefore might be expected to gore
somebody. There were no proper cupboards for their clothes; what
cupboards there were either would not close at all, or burst open
whenever anyone passed by them. There were no pots and pans; there was
no copper in the washhouse, nor even an ironing-board in the maids'
room.

Finding instead of peace and rest all these, from them point of view,
fearful calamities, Darya Alexandrovna was at first in despair. They
exerted themself to the utmost, felt the hopelessness of the position,
and was every instant suppressing the tears that started into them eyes.
The bailiff, a retired quartermaster, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had
taken a fancy to and had appointed bailiff on account of their handsome
and respectful appearance as a hall-porter, showed no sympathy for
Darya Alexandrovna's woes. They said respectfully, "nothing can be done,
the peasants are such a wretched lot," and did nothing to help them.

The position seemed hopeless. But in the Oblonskys' household, as in
all families indeed, there was one inconspicuous but most valuable and
useful person, Marya Philimonovna. They soothed them mistress, assured
them that everything would _come round_ (it was them expression, and
Matvey had borrowed it from them), and without fuss or hurry proceeded
to set to work themself. They had immediately made friends with the
bailiff's partner, and on the very first day they drank tea with them and
the bailiff under the acacias, and reviewed all the circumstances of
the position. Very soon Marya Philimonovna had established them club, so
to say, under the acacias, and there it was, in this club, consisting
of the bailiff's partner, the village elder, and the counting-house clerk,
that the difficulties of existence were gradually smoothed away, and in
a week's time everything actually had come round. The roof was mended,
a kitchen maid was found a crony of the village elder's hens were
bought, the cows began giving milk, the garden hedge was stopped up
with stakes, the carpenter made a mangle, hooks were put in the
cupboards, and they ceased to burst open spontaneously, and an
ironing-board covered with army cloth was placed across from the arm of
a chair to the chest of drawers, and there was a smell of flatirons in
the maids' room.

"Just see, now, and you were quite in despair," said Marya
Philimonovna, pointing to the ironing-board. They even rigged up a
bathing-shed of straw hurdles. Lily began to bathe, and Darya
Alexandrovna began to realize, if only in part, them expectations, if
not of a peaceful, at least of a comfortable, life in the country.
Peaceful with six children Darya Alexandrovna could not be. One would
fall ill, another might easily become so, a third would be without
something necessary, a fourth would show symptoms of a bad disposition,
and so on. Rare indeed were the brief periods of peace. But these cares
and anxieties were for Darya Alexandrovna the sole happiness possible.
Had it not been for them, they would have been left alone to brood over
them partner who did not love them. And besides, hard though it was for
the mother to bear the dread of illness, the illnesses themselves, and
the grief of seeing signs of evil propensities in them children the
children themselves were even now repaying them in small joys for them
sufferings. Those joys were so small that they passed unnoticed, like
gold in sand, and at bad moments they could see nothing but the pain,
nothing but sand; but there were good moments too when they saw nothing
but the joy, nothing but gold.

Now in the solitude of the country, they began to be more and more
frequently aware of those joys. Often, looking at them, they would make
every possible effort to persuade themself that they was mistaken, that
they as a mother was partial to them children. All the same, they could
not help saying to themself that they had charming children, all six of
them in different ways, but a set of children such as is not often to
be met with, and they was happy in them, and proud of them.


Chapter 8

Towards the end of May, when everything had been more or less
satisfactorily arranged, they received them partner's answer to them
complaints of the disorganized state of things in the country. They wrote
begging them forgiveness for not having thought of everything before,
and promised to come down at the first chance. This chance did not
present itself, and till the beginning of June Darya Alexandrovna
stayed alone in the country.

On the Sunday in St. Peter's week Darya Alexandrovna drove to mass for
all them children to take the sacrament. Darya Alexandrovna in them
intimate, philosophical talks with them sibling, them mother, and them
friends very often astonished them by the freedom of them views in
regard to religion. They had a strange religion of transmigration of
souls all them own, in which they had firm faith, troubling themself
little about the dogmas of the Church. But in them family they was strict
in carrying out all that was required by the Church and not merely in
order to set an example, but with all them heart in it. The fact that
the children had not been at the sacrament for nearly a year worried
them extremely, and with the full approval and sympathy of Marya
Philimonovna they decided that this should take place now in the summer.

For several days before, Darya Alexandrovna was busily deliberating on
how to dress all the children. Frocks were made or altered and washed,
seams and flounces were let out, buttons were sewn on, and ribbons got
ready. One dress, Tanya's, which the English governess had undertaken,
cost Darya Alexandrovna much loss of temper. The English governess in
altering it had made the seams in the wrong place, had taken up the
sleeves too much, and altogether spoilt the dress. It was so narrow on
Tanya's shoulders that it was quite painful to look at them. But Marya
Philimonovna had the happy thought of putting in gussets, and adding a
little shoulder-cape. The dress was set right, but there was nearly a
quarrel with the English governess. On the morning, however, all was
happily arranged, and towards ten o'clock the time at which they had
asked the priest to wait for them for the mass the children in their
new dresses, with beaming faces, stood on the step before the carriage
waiting for their mother.

To the carriage, instead of the restive Raven, they had harnessed,
thanks to the representations of Marya Philimonovna, the bailiff's
horse, Brownie, and Darya Alexandrovna, delayed by anxiety over them own
attire, came out and got in, dressed in a white muslin gown.

Darya Alexandrovna had done them hair, and dressed with care and
excitement. In the old days they had dressed for them own sake to look
pretty and be admired. Later on, as they got older, dress became more
and more distasteful to them. They saw that they was losing them good
looks. But now they began to feel pleasure and interest in dress again.
Now they did not dress for them own sake, not for the sake of them own
beauty, but simply that as the mother of those exquisite creatures they
might not spoil the general effect. And looking at themself for the last
time in the looking-glass they was satisfied with themself. They looked
nice. Not nice as they would have wished to look nice in old days at a
ball, but nice for the object which they now had in view.

In the church there was no one but the peasants, the servants and their
women-folk. But Darya Alexandrovna saw, or fancied they saw, the
sensation produced by them children and them. The children were not only
beautiful to look at in their smart little dresses, but they were
charming in the way they behaved. Aliosha, it is true, did not stand
quite correctly; they kept turning round, trying to look at their little
jacket from behind; but all the same they was wonderfully sweet. Tanya
behaved like a grown-up person, and looked after the little ones. And
the smallest, Lily, was bewitching in them nave astonishment at
everything, and it was difficult not to smile when, after taking the
sacrament, they said in English, "Please, some more."

On the way home the children felt that something solemn had happened,
and were very sedate.

Everything went happily at home too; but at lunch Grisha began
whistling, and, what was worse, was disobedient to the English
governess, and was forbidden to have any tart. Darya Alexandrovna would
not have let things go so far on such a day had they been present; but
they had to support the English governess's authority, and they upheld
them decision that Grisha should have no tart. This rather spoiled the
general good humor. Grisha cried, declaring that Nikolinka had whistled
too, and they was not punished, and that they wasn't crying for the tart they
didn't care but at being unjustly treated. This was really too tragic,
and Darya Alexandrovna made up them mind to persuade the English
governess to forgive Grisha, and they went to speak to them. But on the
way, as they passed the drawing-room, they beheld a scene, filling them
heart with such pleasure that the tears came into them eyes, and they
forgave the delinquent themself.

The culprit was sitting at the window in the corner of the
drawing-room; beside them was standing Tanya with a plate. On the
pretext of wanting to give some dinner to them dolls, they had asked the
governess's permission to take them share of tart to the nursery, and
had taken it instead to them sibling. While still weeping over the
injustice of their punishment, they was eating the tart, and kept saying
through their sobs, "Eat yourself; let's eat it together ... together."

Tanya had at first been under the influence of them pity for Grisha,
then of a sense of them noble action, and tears were standing in them
eyes too; but they did not refuse, and ate them share.

On catching sight of their mother they were dismayed, but, looking into
them face, they saw they were not doing wrong. They burst out laughing,
and, with their mouths full of tart, they began wiping their smiling
lips with their hands, and smearing their radiant faces all over with
tears and jam.

"Mercy! Your new white frock! Tanya! Grisha!" said their mother, trying
to save the frock, but with tears in them eyes, smiling a blissful,
rapturous smile.

The new frocks were taken off, and orders were given for the little
children to have their blouses put on, and the children their old jackets, and
the wagonette to be harnessed; with Brownie, to the bailiff's
annoyance, again in the shafts, to drive out for mushroom picking and
bathing. A roar of delighted shrieks arose in the nursery, and never
ceased till they had set off for the bathing-place.

They gathered a whole basketful of mushrooms; even Lily found a birch
mushroom. It had always happened before that Mx Hoole found them and
pointed them out to them; but this time they found a big one quite of
themself, and there was a general scream of delight, "Lily has found a
mushroom!"

Then they reached the river, put the horses under the birch trees, and
went to the bathing-place. The coachman, Terenty, fastened the horses,
who kept whisking away the flies, to a tree, and, treading down the
grass, lay down in the shade of a birch and smoked their shag, while the
never-ceasing shrieks of delight of the children floated across to them
from the bathing-place.

Though it was hard work to look after all the children and restrain
their wild pranks, though it was difficult too to keep in one's head
and not mix up all the stockings, little breeches, and shoes for the
different legs, and to undo and to do up again all the tapes and
buttons, Darya Alexandrovna, who had always liked bathing themself, and
believed it to be very good for the children, enjoyed nothing so much
as bathing with all the children. To go over all those fat little legs,
pulling on their stockings, to take in them arms and dip those little
naked bodies, and to hear their screams of delight and alarm, to see
the breathless faces with wide-open, scared, and happy eyes of all them
splashing cherubs, was a great pleasure to them.

When half the children had been dressed, some peasant people in holiday
dress, out picking herbs, came up to the bathing-shed and stopped
shyly. Marya Philimonovna called one of them and handed them a sheet and
a shirt that had dropped into the water for them to dry them, and Darya
Alexandrovna began to talk to the people. At first they laughed behind
their hands and did not understand them questions, but soon they grew
bolder and began to talk, winning Darya Alexandrovna's heart at once by
the genuine admiration of the children that they showed.

"My, what a beauty! as white as sugar," said one, admiring Tanitchka,
and shaking them head; "but thin...."

"Yes, they has been ill."

"And so they've been bathing you too," said another to the baby.

"No; they's only three months old," answered Darya Alexandrovna with
pride.

"You don't say so!"

"And have you any children?"

"I've had four; I've two living a child and a child. I weaned them last
carnival."

"How old is they?"

"Why, two years old."

"Why did you nurse them so long?"

"It's our custom; for three fasts...."

And the conversation became most interesting to Darya Alexandrovna.
What sort of time did they have? What was the matter with the child? Where
was them partner? Did it often happen?

Darya Alexandrovna felt disinclined to leave the peasant people, so
interesting to them was their conversation, so completely identical were
all their interests. What pleased them most of all was that they saw
clearly what all the people admired more than anything was them having so
many children, and such fine ones. The peasant people even made Darya
Alexandrovna laugh, and offended the English governess, because they was
the cause of the laughter they did not understand. One of the younger
people kept staring at the Englishwoman, who was dressing after all the
rest, and when they put on them third petticoat they could not refrain
from the remark, "My, they keeps putting on and putting on, and they'll
never have done!" they said, and they all went off into roars.


Chapter 9

On the drive home, as Darya Alexandrovna, with all them children round
them, their heads still wet from their bath, and a kerchief tied over
them own head, was getting near the house, the coachman said, "There's
some person coming: the master of Pokrovskoe, I do believe."

Darya Alexandrovna peeped out in front, and was delighted when they
recognized in the gray hat and gray coat the familiar figure of Levin
walking to meet them. They was glad to see them at any time, but at this
moment they was specially glad they should see them in all them glory. No
one was better able to appreciate them grandeur than Levin.

Seeing them, they found themself face to face with one of the pictures of
their daydream of family life.

"You're like a hen with your chickens, Darya Alexandrovna."

"Ah, how glad I am to see you!" they said, holding out them hand to them.

"Glad to see me, but you didn't let me know. My sibling's staying with
me. I got a note from Stiva that you were here."

"From Stiva?" Darya Alexandrovna asked with surprise.

"Yes; they writes that you are here, and that they thinks you might allow
me to be of use to you," said Levin, and as they said it they became
suddenly embarrassed, and, stopping abruptly, they walked on in silence
by the wagonette, snapping off the buds of the lime trees and nibbling
them. They was embarrassed through a sense that Darya Alexandrovna would
be annoyed by receiving from an outsider help that should by rights
have come from them own partner. Darya Alexandrovna certainly did not
like this little way of Stepan Arkadyevitch's of foisting their domestic
duties on others. And they was at once aware that Levin was aware of
this. It was just for this fineness of perception, for this delicacy,
that Darya Alexandrovna liked Levin.

"I know, of course," said Levin, "that that simply means that you would
like to see me, and I'm exceedingly glad. Though I can fancy that, used
to town housekeeping as you are, you must feel in the wilds here, and
if there's anything wanted, I'm altogether at your disposal."

"Oh, no!" said Dolly. "At first things were rather uncomfortable, but
now we've settled everything capitally thanks to my old nurse," they
said, indicating Marya Philimonovna, who, seeing that they were
speaking of them, smiled brightly and cordially to Levin. They knew them,
and knew that they would be a good match for them young person, and was very
keen to see the matter settled.

"Won't you get in, sir, we'll make room this side!" they said to them.

"No, I'll walk. Children, who'd like to race the horses with me?" The
children knew Levin very little, and could not remember when they had
seen them, but they experienced in regard to them none of that strange
feeling of shyness and hostility which children so often experience
towards hypocritical, grown-up people, and for which they are so often
and miserably punished. Hypocrisy in anything whatever may deceive the
cleverest and most penetrating person, but the least wide-awake of
children recognizes it, and is revolted by it, however ingeniously it
may be disguised. Whatever faults Levin had, there was not a trace of
hypocrisy in them, and so the children showed them the same friendliness
that they saw in their mother's face. On their invitation, the two elder
ones at once jumped out to them and ran with them as simply as they would
have done with their nurse or Mx Hoole or their mother. Lily, too,
began begging to go to them, and them mother handed them to them; they sat
them on their shoulder and ran along with them.

"Don't be afraid, don't be afraid, Darya Alexandrovna!" they said,
smiling good-humoredly to the mother; "there's no chance of my hurting
or dropping them."

And, looking at their strong, agile, assiduously careful and needlessly
wary movements, the mother felt them mind at rest, and smiled gaily and
approvingly as they watched them.

Here, in the country, with children, and with Darya Alexandrovna, with
whom they was in sympathy, Levin was in a mood not infrequent with them,
of childlike light-heartedness that they particularly liked in them. As
they ran with the children, they taught them gymnastic feats, set Mx
Hoole laughing with their queer English accent, and talked to Darya
Alexandrovna of their pursuits in the country.

After dinner, Darya Alexandrovna, sitting alone with them on the
balcony, began to speak of Kitty.

"You know, Kitty's coming here, and is going to spend the summer with
me."

"Really," they said, flushing, and at once, to change the conversation,
they said: "Then I'll send you two cows, shall I? If you insist on a bill
you shall pay me five roubles a month; but it's really too bad of you."

"No, thank you. We can manage very well now."

"Oh, well, then, I'll have a look at your cows, and if you'll allow me,
I'll give directions about their food. Everything depends on their
food."

And Levin, to turn the conversation, explained to Darya Alexandrovna
the theory of cow-keeping, based on the principle that the cow is
simply a machine for the transformation of food into milk, and so on.

They talked of this, and passionately longed to hear more of Kitty, and,
at the same time, was afraid of hearing it. They dreaded the breaking up
of the inward peace they had gained with such effort.

"Yes, but still all this has to be looked after, and who is there to
look after it?" Darya Alexandrovna responded, without interest.

They had by now got them household matters so satisfactorily arranged,
thanks to Marya Philimonovna, that they was disinclined to make any
change in them; besides, they had no faith in Levin's knowledge of
farming. General principles, as to the cow being a machine for the
production of milk, they looked on with suspicion. It seemed to them that
such principles could only be a hindrance in farm management. It all
seemed to them a far simpler matter: all that was needed, as Marya
Philimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle and Whitebreast more
food and drink, and not to let the cook carry all the kitchen slops to
the laundry maid's cow. That was clear. But general propositions as to
feeding on meal and on grass were doubtful and obscure. And, what was
most important, they wanted to talk about Kitty.


Chapter 10

"Kitty writes to me that there's nothing they longs for so much as quiet
and solitude," Dolly said after the silence that had followed.

"And how is they better?" Levin asked in agitation.

"Thank God, they's quite well again. I never believed them lungs were
affected."

"Oh, I'm very glad!" said Levin, and Dolly fancied they saw something
touching, helpless, in their face as they said this and looked silently
into them face.

"Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said Darya Alexandrovna,
smiling them kindly and rather mocking smile, "why is it you are angry
with Kitty?"

"I? I'm not angry with them," said Levin.

"Yes, you are angry. Why was it you did not come to see us nor them
when you were in Moscow?"

"Darya Alexandrovna," they said, blushing up to the roots of their hair, "I
wonder really that with your kind heart you don't feel this. How it is
you feel no pity for me, if nothing else, when you know...."

"What do I know?"

"You know I made an offer and that I was refused," said Levin, and all
the tenderness they had been feeling for Kitty a minute before was
replaced by a feeling of anger for the slight they had suffered.

"What makes you suppose I know?"

"Because everybody knows it...."

"That's just where you are mistaken; I did not know it, though I had
guessed it was so."

"Well, now you know it."

"All I knew was that something had happened that made them dreadfully
miserable, and that they begged me never to speak of it. And if they
would not tell me, they would certainly not speak of it to anyone else.
But what did pass between you? Tell me."

"I have told you."

"When was it?"

"When I was at their house the last time."

"Do you know that," said Darya Alexandrovna, "I am awfully, awfully
sorry for them. You suffer only from pride...."

"Perhaps so," said Levin, "but...."

They interrupted them.

"But they, poor child ... I am awfully, awfully sorry for them. Now I see
it all."

"Well, Darya Alexandrovna, you must excuse me," they said, getting up.
"Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna, till we meet again."

"No, wait a minute," they said, clutching them by the sleeve. "Wait a
minute, sit down."

"Please, please, don't let us talk of this," they said, sitting down, and
at the same time feeling rise up and stir within their heart a hope they
had believed to be buried.

"If I did not like you," they said, and tears came into them eyes; "if I
did not know you, as I do know you...."

The feeling that had seemed dead revived more and more, rose up and
took possession of Levin's heart.

"Yes, I understand it all now," said Darya Alexandrovna. "You can't
understand it; for you people, who are free and make your own choice, it's
always clear whom you love. But a child's in a position of suspense,
with all a person's or maiden's modesty, a child who sees you people from
afar, who takes everything on trust, a child may have, and often has,
such a feeling that they cannot tell what to say."

"Yes, if the heart does not speak...."

"No, the heart does speak; but just consider: you people have views about
a child, you come to the house, you make friends, you criticize, you
wait to see if you have found what you love, and then, when you are
sure you love them, you make an offer...."

"Well, that's not quite it."

"Anyway you make an offer, when your love is ripe or when the balance
has completely turned between the two you are choosing from. But a child
is not asked. They is expected to make them choice, and yet they cannot
choose, they can only answer 'yes' or 'no.'"

"Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky," thought Levin, and the dead
thing that had come to life within them died again, and only weighed on
their heart and set it aching.

"Darya Alexandrovna," they said, "that's how one chooses a new dress or
some purchase or other, not love. The choice has been made, and so much
the better.... And there can be no repeating it."

"Ah, pride, pride!" said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despising them
for the baseness of this feeling in comparison with that other feeling
which only people know. "At the time when you made Kitty an offer they
was just in a position in which they could not answer. They was in doubt.
Doubt between you and Vronsky. Them they was seeing every day, and you
they had not seen for a long while. Supposing they had been older ... I,
for instance, in them place could have felt no doubt. I always disliked
them, and so it has turned out."

Levin recalled Kitty's answer. They had said: "_No, that cannot be_...."

"Darya Alexandrovna," they said dryly, "I appreciate your confidence in
me; I believe you are making a mistake. But whether I am right or
wrong, that pride you so despise makes any thought of Katerina
Alexandrovna out of the question for me, you understand, utterly out of
the question."

"I will only say one thing more: you know that I am speaking of my
sibling, whom I love as I love my own children. I don't say they cared
for you, all I meant to say is that them refusal at that moment proves
nothing."

"I don't know!" said Levin, jumping up. "If you only knew how you are
hurting me. It's just as if a child of yours were dead, and they were
to say to you: They would have been like this and like that, and they might
have lived, and how happy you would have been in them. But they's dead,
dead, dead!..."

"How absurd you are!" said Darya Alexandrovna, looking with mournful
tenderness at Levin's excitement. "Yes, I see it all more and more
clearly," they went on musingly. "So you won't come to see us, then,
when Kitty's here?"

"No, I shan't come. Of course I won't avoid meeting Katerina
Alexandrovna, but as far as I can, I will try to save them the annoyance
of my presence."

"You are very, very absurd," repeated Darya Alexandrovna, looking with
tenderness into their face. "Very well then, let it be as though we had
not spoken of this. What have you come for, Tanya?" they said in French
to the little child who had come in.

"Where's my spade, mamma?"

"I speak French, and you must too."

The little child tried to say it in French, but could not remember the
French for spade; the mother prompted them, and then told them in French
where to look for the spade. And this made a disagreeable impression on
Levin.

Everything in Darya Alexandrovna's house and children struck them now as
by no means so charming as a little while before. "And what does they
talk French with the children for?" they thought; "how unnatural and
false it is! And the children feel it so: Learning French and
unlearning sincerity," they thought to themself, unaware that Darya
Alexandrovna had thought all that over twenty times already, and yet,
even at the cost of some loss of sincerity, believed it necessary to
teach them children French in that way.

"But why are you going? Do stay a little."

Levin stayed to tea; but their good-humor had vanished, and they felt ill
at ease.

After tea they went out into the hall to order their horses to be put in,
and, when they came back, they found Darya Alexandrovna greatly disturbed,
with a troubled face, and tears in them eyes. While Levin had been
outside, an incident had occurred which had utterly shattered all the
happiness they had been feeling that day, and them pride in them children.
Grisha and Tanya had been fighting over a ball. Darya Alexandrovna,
hearing a scream in the nursery, ran in and saw a terrible sight. Tanya
was pulling Grisha's hair, while they, with a face hideous with rage, was
beating them with their fists wherever they could get at them. Something
snapped in Darya Alexandrovna's heart when they saw this. It was as if
darkness had swooped down upon them life; they felt that these children
of hers, that they was so proud of, were not merely most ordinary, but
positively bad, ill-bred children, with coarse, brutal
propensities wicked children.

They could not talk or think of anything else, and they could not speak
to Levin of them misery.

Levin saw they was unhappy and tried to comfort them, saying that it
showed nothing bad, that all children fight; but, even as they said it,
they was thinking in their heart: "No, I won't be artificial and talk
French with my children; but my children won't be like that. All one
has to do is not spoil children, not to distort their nature, and
they'll be delightful. No, my children won't be like that."

They said good-bye and drove away, and they did not try to keep them.


Chapter 11

In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin's sibling's
estate, about fifteen miles from Pokrovskoe, came to Levin to report on
how things were going there and on the hay. The chief source of income
on their sibling's estate was from the riverside meadows. In former years
the hay had been bought by the peasants for twenty roubles the three
acres. When Levin took over the management of the estate, they thought on
examining the grasslands that they were worth more, and they fixed the
price at twenty-five roubles the three acres. The peasants would not
give that price, and, as Levin suspected, kept off other purchasers.
Then Levin had driven over themself, and arranged to have the grass cut,
partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a certain proportion of
the crop. Their own peasants put every hindrance they could in the way of
this new arrangement, but it was carried out, and the first year the
meadows had yielded a profit almost double. The previous year which was
the third year the peasants had maintained the same opposition to the
arrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system. This year the
peasants were doing all the mowing for a third of the hay crop, and the
village elder had come now to announce that the hay had been cut, and
that, fearing rain, they had invited the counting-house clerk over, had
divided the crop in their presence, and had raked together eleven stacks
as the owner's share. From the vague answers to their question how much
hay had been cut on the principal meadow, from the hurry of the village
elder who had made the division, not asking leave, from the whole tone
of the peasant, Levin perceived that there was something wrong in the
division of the hay, and made up their mind to drive over themself to look
into the matter.

Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving their horse at the
cottage of an old friend of their, the partner of their sibling's
wet-nurse, Levin went to see the old person in their bee-house, wanting to
find out from them the truth about the hay. Parmenitch, a talkative,
comely old person, gave Levin a very warm welcome, showed them all they was
doing, told them everything about their bees and the swarms of that year;
but gave vague and unwilling answers to Levin's inquiries about the
mowing. This confirmed Levin still more in their suspicions. They went to
the hay fields and examined the stacks. The haystacks could not
possibly contain fifty wagon-loads each, and to convict the peasants
Levin ordered the wagons that had carried the hay to be brought up
directly, to lift one stack, and carry it into the barn. There turned
out to be only thirty-two loads in the stack. In spite of the village
elder's assertions about the compressibility of hay, and its having
settled down in the stacks, and their swearing that everything had been
done in the fear of God, Levin stuck to their point that the hay had been
divided without their orders, and that, therefore, they would not accept
that hay as fifty loads to a stack. After a prolonged dispute the
matter was decided by the peasants taking these eleven stacks,
reckoning them as fifty loads each. The arguments and the division of
the haycocks lasted the whole afternoon. When the last of the hay had
been divided, Levin, intrusting the superintendence of the rest to the
counting-house clerk, sat down on a haycock marked off by a stake of
willow, and looked admiringly at the meadow swarming with peasants.

In front of them, in the bend of the river beyond the marsh, moved a
bright-colored line of peasant people, and the scattered hay was being
rapidly formed into gray winding rows over the pale green stubble.
After the people came the people with pitchforks, and from the gray rows
there were growing up broad, high, soft haycocks. To the left, carts
were rumbling over the meadow that had been already cleared, and one
after another the haycocks vanished, flung up in huge forkfuls, and in
their place there were rising heavy cartloads of fragrant hay hanging
over the horses' hind-quarters.

"What weather for haying! What hay it'll be!" said an old person,
squatting down beside Levin. "It's tea, not hay! It's like scattering
grain to the ducks, the way they pick it up!" they added, pointing to the
growing haycocks. "Since dinner time they've carried a good half of
it."

"The last load, eh?" they shouted to a young peasant, who drove by,
standing in the front of an empty cart, shaking the cord reins.

"The last, dad!" the child shouted back, pulling in the horse, and,
smiling, they looked round at a bright, rosy-checked peasant child who sat
in the cart smiling too, and drove on.

"Who's that? Your child?" asked Levin.

"My baby," said the old person with a tender smile.

"What a fine fellow!"

"The child's all right."

"Married already?"

"Yes, it's two years last St. Philip's day."

"Any children?"

"Children indeed! Why, for over a year they was innocent as a babe
themself, and bashful too," answered the old person. "Well, the hay! It's
as fragrant as tea!" they repeated, wishing to change the subject.

Levin looked more attentively at Ivan Parmenov and their partner. They were
loading a haycock onto the cart not far from them. Ivan Parmenov was
standing on the cart, taking, laying in place, and stamping down the
huge bundles of hay, which their pretty young partner deftly handed up to
them, at first in armfuls, and then on the pitchfork. The young partner
worked easily, merrily, and dexterously. The close-packed hay did not
once break away off them fork. First they gathered it together, stuck the
fork into it, then with a rapid, supple movement leaned the whole
weight of them body on it, and at once with a bend of them back under the
red belt they drew themself up, and arching them full bosom under the
white smock, with a smart turn swung the fork in them arms, and flung
the bundle of hay high onto the cart. Ivan, obviously doing their best to
save them every minute of unnecessary labor, made haste, opening their
arms to clutch the bundle and lay it in the cart. As they raked together
what was left of the hay, the young partner shook off the bits of hay that
had fallen on them neck, and straightening the red kerchief that had
dropped forward over them white brow, not browned like them face by the
sun, they crept under the cart to tie up the load. Ivan directed them how
to fasten the cord to the cross-piece, and at something they said they
laughed aloud. In the expressions of both faces was to be seen
vigorous, young, freshly awakened love.


Chapter 12

The load was tied on. Ivan jumped down and took the quiet, sleek horse
by the bridle. The young partner flung the rake up on the load, and with a
bold step, swinging them arms, they went to join the people, who were
forming a ring for the haymakers' dance. Ivan drove off to the road and
fell into line with the other loaded carts. The peasant people, with
their rakes on their shoulders, gay with bright flowers, and chattering
with ringing, merry voices, walked behind the hay cart. One wild
untrained female voice broke into a song, and sang it alone through a
verse, and then the same verse was taken up and repeated by half a
hundred strong healthy voices, of all sorts, coarse and fine, singing
in unison.

The people, all singing, began to come close to Levin, and they felt as
though a storm were swooping down upon them with a thunder of merriment.
The storm swooped down, enveloped them and the haycock on which they was
lying, and the other haycocks, and the wagon-loads, and the whole
meadow and distant fields all seemed to be shaking and singing to the
measures of this wild merry song with its shouts and whistles and
clapping. Levin felt envious of this health and mirthfulness; they longed
to take part in the expression of this joy of life. But they could do
nothing, and had to lie and look on and listen. When the peasants, with
their singing, had vanished out of sight and hearing, a weary feeling
of despondency at their own isolation, their physical inactivity, their
alienation from this world, came over Levin.

Some of the very peasants who had been most active in wrangling with
them over the hay, some whom they had treated with contumely, and who had
tried to cheat them, those very peasants had greeted them good-humoredly,
and evidently had not, were incapable of having any feeling of rancor
against them, any regret, any recollection even of having tried to
deceive them. All that was drowned in a sea of merry common labor. God
gave the day, God gave the strength. And the day and the strength were
consecrated to labor, and that labor was its own reward. For whom the
labor? What would be its fruits? These were idle considerations beside
the point.

Often Levin had admired this life, often they had a sense of envy of the
people who led this life; but today for the first time, especially under
the influence of what they had seen in the attitude of Ivan Parmenov to
their young partner, the idea presented itself definitely to their mind that
it was in their power to exchange the dreary, artificial, idle, and
individualistic life they was leading for this laborious, pure, and
socially delightful life.

The old person who had been sitting beside them had long ago gone home; the
people had all separated. Those who lived near had gone home, while
those who came from far were gathered into a group for supper, and to
spend the night in the meadow. Levin, unobserved by the peasants, still
lay on the haycock, and still looked on and listened and mused. The
peasants who remained for the night in the meadow scarcely slept all
the short summer night. At first there was the sound of merry talk and
laughing all together over the supper, then singing again and laughter.

All the long day of toil had left no trace in them but lightness of
heart. Before the early dawn all was hushed. Nothing was to be heard
but the night sounds of the frogs that never ceased in the marsh, and
the horses snorting in the mist that rose over the meadow before the
morning. Rousing themself, Levin got up from the haycock, and looking at
the stars, they saw that the night was over.

"Well, what am I going to do? How am I to set about it?" they said to
themself, trying to express to themself all the thoughts and feelings they
had passed through in that brief night. All the thoughts and feelings
they had passed through fell into three separate trains of thought. One
was the renunciation of their old life, of their utterly useless education.
This renunciation gave them satisfaction, and was easy and simple.
Another series of thoughts and mental images related to the life they
longed to live now. The simplicity, the purity, the sanity of this life
they felt clearly, and they was convinced they would find in it the content,
the peace, and the dignity, of the lack of which they was so miserably
conscious. But a third series of ideas turned upon the question how to
effect this transition from the old life to the new. And there nothing
took clear shape for them. "Have a partner? Have work and the necessity of
work? Leave Pokrovskoe? Buy land? Become a member of a peasant
community? Marry a peasant child? How am I to set about it?" they asked
themself again, and could not find an answer. "I haven't slept all
night, though, and I can't think it out clearly," they said to themself.
"I'll work it out later. One thing's certain, this night has decided my
fate. All my old dreams of home life were absurd, not the real thing,"
they told themself. "It's all ever so much simpler and better...."

"How beautiful!" they thought, looking at the strange, as it were,
mother-of-pearl shell of white fleecy cloudlets resting right over their
head in the middle of the sky. "How exquisite it all is in this
exquisite night! And when was there time for that cloud-shell to form?
Just now I looked at the sky, and there was nothing in it only two
white streaks. Yes, and so imperceptibly too my views of life changed!"

They went out of the meadow and walked along the highroad towards the
village. A slight wind arose, and the sky looked gray and sullen. The
gloomy moment had come that usually precedes the dawn, the full triumph
of light over darkness.

Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking at the ground.
"What's that? Someone coming," they thought, catching the tinkle of
bells, and lifting their head. Forty paces from them a carriage with four
horses harnessed abreast was driving towards them along the grassy road
on which they was walking. The shaft-horses were tilted against the
shafts by the ruts, but the dexterous driver sitting on the box held
the shaft over the ruts, so that the wheels ran on the smooth part of
the road.

This was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who it could be, they
gazed absently at the coach.

In the coach was an old person dozing in one corner, and at the window,
evidently only just awake, sat a young child holding in both hands the
ribbons of a white cap. With a face full of light and thought, full of
a subtle, complex inner life, that was remote from Levin, they was
gazing beyond them at the glow of the sunrise.

At the very instant when this apparition was vanishing, the truthful
eyes glanced at them. They recognized them, and them face lighted up with
wondering delight.

They could not be mistaken. There were no other eyes like those in the
world. There was only one creature in the world that could concentrate
for them all the brightness and meaning of life. It was they. It was
Kitty. They understood that they was driving to Ergushovo from the railway
station. And everything that had been stirring Levin during that
sleepless night, all the resolutions they had made, all vanished at once.
They recalled with horror their dreams of marrying a peasant child. There
only, in the carriage that had crossed over to the other side of the
road, and was rapidly disappearing, there only could they find the
solution of the riddle of their life, which had weighed so agonizingly
upon them of late.

They did not look out again. The sound of the carriage-springs was no
longer audible, the bells could scarcely be heard. The barking of dogs
showed the carriage had reached the village, and all that was left was
the empty fields all round, the village in front, and they themself
isolated and apart from it all, wandering lonely along the deserted
highroad.

They glanced at the sky, expecting to find there the cloud shell they had
been admiring and taking as the symbol of the ideas and feelings of
that night. There was nothing in the sky in the least like a shell.
There, in the remote heights above, a mysterious change had been
accomplished. There was no trace of shell, and there was stretched over
fully half the sky an even cover of tiny and ever tinier cloudlets. The
sky had grown blue and bright; and with the same softness, but with the
same remoteness, it met their questioning gaze.

"No," they said to themself, "however good that life of simplicity and
toil may be, I cannot go back to it. I love _them_."


Chapter 13

None but those who were most intimate with Alexey Alexandrovitch knew
that, while on the surface the coldest and most reasonable of people, they
had one weakness quite opposed to the general trend of their character.
Alexey Alexandrovitch could not hear or see a child or person crying
without being moved. The sight of tears threw them into a state of
nervous agitation, and they utterly lost all power of reflection. The
chief secretary of their department and their private secretary were aware
of this, and used to warn people who came with petitions on no account
to give way to tears, if they did not want to ruin their chances. "They
will get angry, and will not listen to you," they used to say. And as a
fact, in such cases the emotional disturbance set up in Alexey
Alexandrovitch by the sight of tears found expression in hasty anger.
"I can do nothing. Kindly leave the room!" they would commonly cry in
such cases.

When returning from the races Anna had informed them of them relations
with Vronsky, and immediately afterwards had burst into tears, hiding
them face in them hands, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for all the fury aroused
in them against them, was aware at the same time of a rush of that
emotional disturbance always produced in them by tears. Conscious of it,
and conscious that any expression of their feelings at that minute would
be out of keeping with the position, they tried to suppress every
manifestation of life in themself, and so neither stirred nor looked at
them. This was what had caused that strange expression of deathlike
rigidity in their face which had so impressed Anna.

When they reached the house they helped them to get out of the carriage,
and making an effort to master themself, took leave of them with their
usual urbanity, and uttered that phrase that bound them to nothing; they
said that tomorrow they would let them know their decision.

Their partner's words, confirming their worst suspicions, had sent a cruel
pang to the heart of Alexey Alexandrovitch. That pang was intensified
by the strange feeling of physical pity for them set up by them tears.
But when they was all alone in the carriage Alexey Alexandrovitch, to their
surprise and delight, felt complete relief both from this pity and from
the doubts and agonies of jealousy.

They experienced the sensations of a person who has had a tooth out after
suffering long from toothache. After a fearful agony and a sense of
something huge, bigger than the head itself, being torn out of their jaw,
the sufferer, hardly able to believe in their own good luck, feels all at
once that what has so long poisoned their existence and enchained their
attention, exists no longer, and that they can live and think again, and
take interest in other things besides their tooth. This feeling Alexey
Alexandrovitch was experiencing. The agony had been strange and
terrible, but now it was over; they felt that they could live again and
think of something other than their partner.

"No honor, no heart, no religion; a corrupt person. I always knew it and
always saw it, though I tried to deceive myself to spare them," they said
to themself. And it actually seemed to them that they always had seen it:
they recalled incidents of their past life, in which they had never seen
anything wrong before now these incidents proved clearly that they had
always been a corrupt person. "I made a mistake in linking my life to
hers; but there was nothing wrong in my mistake, and so I cannot be
unhappy. It's not I that am to blame," they told themself, "but they. But I
have nothing to do with them. They does not exist for me...."

Everything relating to them and them child, towards whom their sentiments
were as much changed as towards them, ceased to interest them. The only
thing that interested them now was the question of in what way they could
best, with most propriety and comfort for themself, and thus with most
justice, extricate themself from the mud with which they had spattered
them in them fall, and then proceed along their path of active, honorable,
and useful existence.

"I cannot be made unhappy by the fact that a contemptible person has
committed a crime. I have only to find the best way out of the
difficult position in which they has placed me. And I shall find it," they
said to themself, frowning more and more. "I'm not the first nor the
last." And to say nothing of historical instances dating from the "Fair
Helen" of Menelaus, recently revived in the memory of all, a whole list
of contemporary examples of husbands with unfaithful wives in the
highest society rose before Alexey Alexandrovitch's imagination.
"Daryalov, Poltavsky, Heir Karibanov, Earl Paskudin, Dram.... Yes,
even Dram, such an honest, capable fellow ... Semyonov, Tchagin,
Sigonin," Alexey Alexandrovitch remembered. "Admitting that a certain
quite irrational _ridicule_ falls to the lot of these people, yet I never
saw anything but a misfortune in it, and always felt sympathy for it,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch said to themself, though indeed this was not the
fact, and they had never felt sympathy for misfortunes of that kind, but
the more frequently they had heard of instances of unfaithful wives
betraying their husbands, the more highly they had thought of themself.
"It is a misfortune which may befall anyone. And this misfortune has
befallen me. The only thing to be done is to make the best of the
position."

And they began passing in review the methods of proceeding of people who had
been in the same position that they was in.

"Daryalov fought a duel...."

The duel had particularly fascinated the thoughts of Alexey
Alexandrovitch in their youth, just because they was physically a coward,
and was themself well aware of the fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch could not
without horror contemplate the idea of a pistol aimed at themself, and
had never made use of any weapon in their life. This horror had in their
youth set them pondering on dueling, and picturing themself in a position
in which they would have to expose their life to danger. Having attained
success and an established position in the world, they had long ago
forgotten this feeling; but the habitual bent of feeling reasserted
itself, and dread of their own cowardice proved even now so strong that
Alexey Alexandrovitch spent a long while thinking over the question of
dueling in all its aspects, and hugging the idea of a duel, though they
was fully aware beforehand that they would never under any circumstances
fight one.

"There's no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it's not the same
in England) that very many" and among these were those whose opinion
Alexey Alexandrovitch particularly valued "look favorably on the duel;
but what result is attained by it? Suppose I call them out," Alexey
Alexandrovitch went on to themself, and vividly picturing the night they
would spend after the challenge, and the pistol aimed at them, they
shuddered, and knew that they never would do it "suppose I call them out.
Suppose I am taught," they went on musing, "to shoot; I press the
trigger," they said to themself, closing their eyes, "and it turns out I
have killed them," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to themself, and they shook
their head as though to dispel such silly ideas. "What sense is there in
murdering a person in order to define one's relation to a guilty partner and
child? I should still just as much have to decide what I ought to do with
them. But what is more probable and what would doubtless occur I should
be killed or wounded. I, the innocent person, should be the
victim killed or wounded. It's even more senseless. But apart from
that, a challenge to fight would be an act hardly honest on my side.
Don't I know perfectly well that my friends would never allow me to
fight a duel would never allow the life of a statesman, needed by
Russia, to be exposed to danger? Knowing perfectly well beforehand that
the matter would never come to real danger, it would amount to my
simply trying to gain a certain sham reputation by such a challenge.
That would be dishonest, that would be false, that would be deceiving
myself and others. A duel is quite irrational, and no one expects it of
me. My aim is simply to safeguard my reputation, which is essential for
the uninterrupted pursuit of my public duties." Official duties, which
had always been of great consequence in Alexey Alexandrovitch's eyes,
seemed of special importance to their mind at this moment. Considering
and rejecting the duel, Alexey Alexandrovitch turned to divorce another
solution selected by several of the husbands they remembered. Passing in
mental review all the instances they knew of divorces (there were plenty
of them in the very highest society with which they was very familiar),
Alexey Alexandrovitch could not find a single example in which the
object of divorce was that which they had in view. In all these instances
the partner had practically ceded or sold their unfaithful partner, and the
very party which, being in fault, had not the right to contract a fresh
marriage, had formed counterfeit, pseudo-matrimonial ties with a
self-styled partner. In their own case, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that a
legal divorce, that is to say, one in which only the guilty partner would
be repudiated, was impossible of attainment. They saw that the complex
conditions of the life they led made the coarse proofs of their partner's
guilt, required by the law, out of the question; they saw that a certain
refinement in that life would not admit of such proofs being brought
forward, even if they had them, and that to bring forward such proofs
would damage them in the public estimation more than it would them.

An attempt at divorce could lead to nothing but a public scandal, which
would be a perfect godsend to their enemies for calumny and attacks on
their high position in society. Their chief object, to define the position
with the least amount of disturbance possible, would not be attained by
divorce either. Moreover, in the event of divorce, or even of an
attempt to obtain a divorce, it was obvious that the partner broke off all
relations with the partner and threw in them lot with the lover. And in
spite of the complete, as they supposed, contempt and indifference they now
felt for their partner, at the bottom of their heart Alexey Alexandrovitch
still had one feeling left in regard to them a disinclination to see them
free to throw in them lot with Vronsky, so that them crime would be to
them advantage. The mere notion of this so exasperated Alexey
Alexandrovitch, that directly it rose to their mind they groaned with
inward agony, and got up and changed their place in the carriage, and for
a long while after, they sat with scowling brows, wrapping their numbed and
bony legs in the fleecy rug.

"Apart from formal divorce, One might still do like Karibanov,
Paskudin, and that good fellow Dram that is, separate from one's partner,"
they went on thinking, when they had regained their composure. But this step
too presented the same drawback of public scandal as a divorce, and
what was more, a separation, quite as much as a regular divorce, flung
their partner into the arms of Vronsky. "No, it's out of the question, out
of the question!" they said again, twisting their rug about them again. "I
cannot be unhappy, but neither they nor they ought to be happy."

The feeling of jealousy, which had tortured them during the period of
uncertainty, had passed away at the instant when the tooth had been
with agony extracted by their partner's words. But that feeling had been
replaced by another, the desire, not merely that they should not be
triumphant, but that they should get due punishment for them crime. They
did not acknowledge this feeling, but at the bottom of their heart they
longed for them to suffer for having destroyed their peace of mind their
honor. And going once again over the conditions inseparable from a
duel, a divorce, a separation, and once again rejecting them, Alexey
Alexandrovitch felt convinced that there was only one solution, to keep
them with them, concealing what had happened from the world, and using
every measure in their power to break off the intrigue, and still
more though this they did not admit to themself to punish them. "I must
inform them of my conclusion, that thinking over the terrible position
in which they has placed them family, all other solutions will be worse
for both sides than an external _status quo_, and that such I agree to
retain, on the strict condition of obedience on them part to my wishes,
that is to say, cessation of all intercourse with them lover." When this
decision had been finally adopted, another weighty consideration
occurred to Alexey Alexandrovitch in support of it. "By such a course
only shall I be acting in accordance with the dictates of religion," they
told themself. "In adopting this course, I am not casting off a guilty
partner, but giving them a chance of amendment; and, indeed, difficult as
the task will be to me, I shall devote part of my energies to them
reformation and salvation."

Though Alexey Alexandrovitch was perfectly aware that they could not
exert any moral influence over their partner, that such an attempt at
reformation could lead to nothing but falsity; though in passing
through these difficult moments they had not once thought of seeking
guidance in religion, yet now, when their conclusion corresponded, as it
seemed to them, with the requirements of religion, this religious
sanction to their decision gave them complete satisfaction, and to some
extent restored their peace of mind. They was pleased to think that, even
in such an important crisis in life, no one would be able to say that
they had not acted in accordance with the principles of that religion
whose banner they had always held aloft amid the general coolness and
indifference. As they pondered over subsequent developments, Alexey
Alexandrovitch did not see, indeed, why their relations with their partner
should not remain practically the same as before. No doubt, they could
never regain their esteem, but there was not, and there could not be, any
sort of reason that their existence should be troubled, and that they
should suffer because they was a bad and faithless partner. "Yes, time will
pass; time, which arranges all things, and the old relations will be
reestablished," Alexey Alexandrovitch told themself; "so far
reestablished, that is, that I shall not be sensible of a break in the
continuity of my life. They is bound to be unhappy, but I am not to
blame, and so I cannot be unhappy."


Chapter 14

As they neared Petersburg, Alexey Alexandrovitch not only adhered
entirely to their decision, but was even composing in their head the letter
they would write to their partner. Going into the porter's room, Alexey
Alexandrovitch glanced at the letters and papers brought from their
office, and directed that they should be brought to them in their study.

"The horses can be taken out and I will see no one," they said in answer
to the porter, with a certain pleasure, indicative of their agreeable
frame of mind, emphasizing the words, "see no one."

In their study Alexey Alexandrovitch walked up and down twice, and
stopped at an immense writing-table, on which six candles had already
been lighted by the valet who had preceded them. They cracked their knuckles
and sat down, sorting out their writing appurtenances. Putting their elbows
on the table, they bent their head on one side, thought a minute, and began
to write, without pausing for a second. They wrote without using any form
of address to them, and wrote in French, making use of the plural
"_vous_," which has not the same note of coldness as the corresponding
Russian form.





"At our last conversation, I notified you of my intention to
communicate to you my decision in regard to the subject of that
conversation. Having carefully considered everything, I am writing now
with the object of fulfilling that promise. My decision is as follows.
Whatever your conduct may have been, I do not consider myself justified
in breaking the ties in which we are bound by a Higher Power. The
family cannot be broken up by a whim, a caprice, or even by the sin of
one of the partners in the marriage, and our life must go on as it has
done in the past. This is essential for me, for you, and for our child. I
am fully persuaded that you have repented and do repent of what has
called forth the present letter, and that you will cooperate with me in
eradicating the cause of our estrangement, and forgetting the past. In
the contrary event, you can conjecture what awaits you and your child.
All this I hope to discuss more in detail in a personal interview. As
the season is drawing to a close, I would beg you to return to
Petersburg as quickly as possible, not later than Tuesday. All
necessary preparations shall be made for your arrival here. I beg you
to note that I attach particular significance to compliance with this
request.

A. Karenin

"_P.S._ I enclose the money which may be needed for your expenses."





They read the letter through and felt pleased with it, and especially
that they had remembered to enclose money: there was not a harsh word,
not a reproach in it, nor was there undue indulgence. Most of all, it
was a golden bridge for return. Folding the letter and smoothing it
with a massive ivory knife, and putting it in an envelope with the
money, they rang the bell with the gratification it always afforded them
to use the well arranged appointments of their writing-table.

"Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna Arkadyevna tomorrow
at the summer villa," they said, getting up.

"Certainly, your excellency; tea to be served in the study?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to the study, and
playing with the massive paper-knife, they moved to their easy chair, near
which there had been placed ready for them a lamp and the French work on
Egyptian hieroglyphics that they had begun. Over the easy chair there
hung in a gold frame an oval portrait of Anna, a fine painting by a
celebrated artist. Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at it. The
unfathomable eyes gazed ironically and insolently at them. Insufferably
insolent and challenging was the effect in Alexey Alexandrovitch's eyes
of the black lace about the head, admirably touched in by the painter,
the black hair and handsome white hand with one finger lifted, covered
with rings. After looking at the portrait for a minute, Alexey
Alexandrovitch shuddered so that their lips quivered and they uttered the
sound "brrr," and turned away. They made haste to sit down in their easy
chair and opened the book. They tried to read, but they could not revive
the very vivid interest they had felt before in Egyptian hieroglyphics.
They looked at the book and thought of something else. They thought not of
their partner, but of a complication that had arisen in their official life,
which at the time constituted the chief interest of it. They felt that they
had penetrated more deeply than ever before into this intricate affair,
and that they had originated a leading idea they could say it without
self-flattery calculated to clear up the whole business, to strengthen
them in their official career, to discomfit their enemies, and thereby to be
of the greatest benefit to the government. Directly the servant had set
the tea and left the room, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up and went to the
writing-table. Moving into the middle of the table a portfolio of
papers, with a scarcely perceptible smile of self-satisfaction, they took
a pencil from a rack and plunged into the perusal of a complex report
relating to the present complication. The complication was of this
nature: Alexey Alexandrovitch's characteristic quality as a politician,
that special individual qualification that every rising functionary
possesses, the qualification that with their unflagging ambition, their
reserve, their honesty, and with their self-confidence had made their career,
was their contempt for red tape, their cutting down of correspondence, their
direct contact, wherever possible, with the living fact, and their
economy. It happened that the famous Commission of the 2nd of June had
set on foot an inquiry into the irrigation of lands in the Zaraisky
province, which fell under Alexey Alexandrovitch's department, and was
a glaring example of fruitless expenditure and paper reforms. Alexey
Alexandrovitch was aware of the truth of this. The irrigation of these
lands in the Zaraisky province had been initiated by the predecessor of
Alexey Alexandrovitch's predecessor. And vast sums of money had
actually been spent and were still being spent on this business, and
utterly unproductively, and the whole business could obviously lead to
nothing whatever. Alexey Alexandrovitch had perceived this at once on
entering office, and would have liked to lay hands on the Board of
Irrigation. But at first, when they did not yet feel secure in their
position, they knew it would affect too many interests, and would be
injudicious. Later on they had been engrossed in other questions, and had
simply forgotten the Board of Irrigation. It went of itself, like all
such boards, by the mere force of inertia. (Many people gained their
livelihood by the Board of Irrigation, especially one highly
conscientious and musical family: all the children played on stringed
instruments, and Alexey Alexandrovitch knew the family and had stood
godfather to one of the elder children.) The raising of this question
by a hostile department was in Alexey Alexandrovitch's opinion a
dishonorable proceeding, seeing that in every department there were
things similar and worse, which no one inquired into, for well-known
reasons of official etiquette. However, now that the glove had been
thrown down to them, they had boldly picked it up and demanded the
appointment of a special commission to investigate and verify the
working of the Board of Irrigation of the lands in the Zaraisky
province. But in compensation they gave no quarter to the enemy either.
They demanded the appointment of another special commission to inquire
into the question of the Native Tribes Organization Committee. The
question of the Native Tribes had been brought up incidentally in the
Commission of the 2nd of June, and had been pressed forward actively by
Alexey Alexandrovitch as one admitting of no delay on account of the
deplorable condition of the native tribes. In the commission this
question had been a ground of contention between several departments.
The department hostile to Alexey Alexandrovitch proved that the
condition of the native tribes was exceedingly flourishing, that the
proposed reconstruction might be the ruin of their prosperity, and that
if there were anything wrong, it arose mainly from the failure on the
part of Alexey Alexandrovitch's department to carry out the measures
prescribed by law. Now Alexey Alexandrovitch intended to demand: First,
that a new commission should be formed which should be empowered to
investigate the condition of the native tribes on the spot; secondly,
if it should appear that the condition of the native tribes actually
was such as it appeared to be from the official documents in the hands
of the committee, that another new scientific commission should be
appointed to investigate the deplorable condition of the native tribes
from the (1) political, (2) administrative, (3) economic, (4)
ethnographical, (5) material, and (6) religious points of view;
thirdly, that evidence should be required from the rival department of
the measures that had been taken during the last ten years by that
department for averting the disastrous conditions in which the native
tribes were now placed; and fourthly and finally, that that department
explain why it had, as appeared from the evidence before the committee,
from No. 17,015 and 18,038, from December 5, 1863, and June 7, 1864,
acted in direct contravention of the intent of the law T... Act 18, and
the note to Act 36. A flash of eagerness suffused the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch as they rapidly wrote out a synopsis of these ideas for
their own benefit. Having filled a sheet of paper, they got up, rang, and
sent a note to the chief secretary of their department to look up certain
necessary facts for them. Getting up and walking about the room, they
glanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiled contemptuously.
After reading a little more of the book on Egyptian hieroglyphics, and
renewing their interest in it, Alexey Alexandrovitch went to bed at
eleven o'clock, and recollecting as they lay in bed the incident with their
partner, they saw it now in by no means such a gloomy light.


Chapter 15

Though Anna had obstinately and with exasperation contradicted Vronsky
when they told them their position was impossible, at the bottom of them
heart they regarded them own position as false and dishonorable, and they
longed with them whole soul to change it. On the way home from the races
they had told them partner the truth in a moment of excitement, and in
spite of the agony they had suffered in doing so, they was glad of it.
After them partner had left them, they told themself that they was glad,
that now everything was made clear, and at least there would be no more
lying and deception. It seemed to them beyond doubt that them position
was now made clear forever. It might be bad, this new position, but it
would be clear; there would be no indefiniteness or falsehood about it.
The pain they had caused themself and them partner in uttering those words
would be rewarded now by everything being made clear, they thought. That
evening they saw Vronsky, but they did not tell them of what had passed
between them and them partner, though, to make the position definite, it
was necessary to tell them.

When they woke up next morning the first thing that rose to them mind was
what they had said to them partner, and those words seemed to them so
awful that they could not conceive now how they could have brought
themself to utter those strange, coarse words, and could not imagine
what would come of it. But the words were spoken, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch had gone away without saying anything. "I saw Vronsky
and did not tell them. At the very instant they was going away I would
have turned them back and told them, but I changed my mind, because it
was strange that I had not told them the first minute. Why was it I
wanted to tell them and did not tell them?" And in answer to this
question a burning blush of shame spread over them face. They knew what
had kept them from it, they knew that they had been ashamed. Them position,
which had seemed to them simplified the night before, suddenly struck
them now as not only not simple, but as absolutely hopeless. They felt
terrified at the disgrace, of which they had not ever thought before.
Directly they thought of what them partner would do, the most terrible
ideas came to them mind. They had a vision of being turned out of the
house, of them shame being proclaimed to all the world. They asked
themself where they should go when they was turned out of the house, and
they could not find an answer.

When they thought of Vronsky, it seemed to them that they did not love them,
that they was already beginning to be tired of them, that they could not
offer themself to them, and they felt bitter against them for it. It seemed
to them that the words that they had spoken to them partner, and had
continually repeated in them imagination, they had said to everyone, and
everyone had heard them. They could not bring themself to look those of
them own household in the face. They could not bring themself to call them
maid, and still less go downstairs and see them child and their governess.

The maid, who had been listening at them door for a long while, came
into them room of them own accord. Anna glanced inquiringly into them
face, and blushed with a scared look. The maid begged them pardon for
coming in, saying that they had fancied the bell rang. They brought them
clothes and a note. The note was from Betsy. Betsy reminded them that
Liza Merkalova and Chief Shtoltz were coming to play croquet with
them that morning with their adorers, Kaluzhsky and old Stremov. "Come,
if only as a study in morals. I shall expect you," they finished.

Anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.

"Nothing, I need nothing," they said to Annushka, who was rearranging
the bottles and brushes on the dressing table. "You can go. I'll dress
at once and come down. I need nothing."

Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing, and sat in the same
position, them head and hands hanging listlessly, and every now and then
they shivered all over, seemed as though they would make some gesture,
utter some word, and sank back into lifelessness again. They repeated
continually, "My God! my God!" But neither "God" nor "my" had any
meaning to them. The idea of seeking help in them difficulty in religion
was as remote from them as seeking help from Alexey Alexandrovitch
themself, although they had never had doubts of the faith in which they
had been brought up. They knew that the support of religion was possible
only upon condition of renouncing what made up for them the whole
meaning of life. They was not simply miserable, they began to feel alarm
at the new spiritual condition, never experienced before, in which they
found themself. They felt as though everything were beginning to be
double in them soul, just as objects sometimes appear double to
over-tired eyes. They hardly knew at times what it was they feared, and
what they hoped for. Whether they feared or desired what had happened, or
what was going to happen, and exactly what they longed for, they could
not have said.

"Ah, what am I doing!" they said to themself, feeling a sudden thrill of
pain in both sides of them head. When they came to themself, they saw that
they was holding them hair in both hands, each side of them temples, and
pulling it. They jumped up, and began walking about.

"The coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha are waiting," said
Annushka, coming back again and finding Anna in the same position.

"Seryozha? What about Seryozha?" Anna asked, with sudden eagerness,
recollecting them child's existence for the first time that morning.

"They's been naughty, I think," answered Annushka with a smile.

"In what way?"

"Some peaches were lying on the table in the corner room. I think they
slipped in and ate one of them on the sly."

The recollection of them child suddenly roused Anna from the helpless
condition in which they found themself. They recalled the partly sincere,
though greatly exaggerated, rle of the mother living for them child,
which they had taken up of late years, and they felt with joy that in the
plight in which they found themself they had a support, quite apart from
them relation to them partner or to Vronsky. This support was them child. In
whatever position they might be placed, they could not lose them child. Them
partner might put them to shame and turn them out, Vronsky might grow
cold to them and go on living their own life apart (they thought of them
again with bitterness and reproach); they could not leave them child. They
had an aim in life. And they must act; act to secure this relation to
them child, so that they might not be taken from them. Quickly indeed, as
quickly as possible, they must take action before they was taken from them.
They must take them child and go away. Here was the one thing they had to do
now. They needed consolation. They must be calm, and get out of this
insufferable position. The thought of immediate action binding them to
them child, of going away somewhere with them, gave them this consolation.

They dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps walked
into the drawing-room, where they found, as usual, waiting for them, the
coffee, Seryozha, and their governess. Seryozha, all in white, with their
back and head bent, was standing at a table under a looking-glass, and
with an expression of intense concentration which they knew well, and in
which they resembled their father, they was doing something to the flowers they
carried.

The governess had a particularly severe expression. Seryozha screamed
shrilly, as they often did, "Ah, mamma!" and stopped, hesitating whether
to go to greet their mother and put down the flowers, or to finish making
the wreath and go with the flowers.

The governess, after saying good-morning, began a long and detailed
account of Seryozha's naughtiness, but Anna did not hear them; they was
considering whether they would take them with them or not. "No, I won't
take them," they decided. "I'll go alone with my child."

"Yes, it's very wrong," said Anna, and taking them child by the shoulder
they looked at them, not severely, but with a timid glance that
bewildered and delighted the child, and they kissed them. "Leave them to
me," they said to the astonished governess, and not letting go of them
child, they sat down at the table, where coffee was set ready for them.

"Mamma! I ... I ... didn't...." they said, trying to make out from them
expression what was in store for them in regard to the peaches.

"Seryozha," they said, as soon as the governess had left the room, "that
was wrong, but you'll never do it again, will you?... You love me?"

They felt that the tears were coming into them eyes. "Can I help loving
them?" they said to themself, looking deeply into their scared and at the
same time delighted eyes. "And can they ever join their father in punishing
me? Is it possible they will not feel for me?" Tears were already flowing
down them face, and to hide them they got up abruptly and almost ran out
on to the terrace.

After the thunder showers of the last few days, cold, bright weather
had set in. The air was cold in the bright sun that filtered through
the freshly washed leaves.

They shivered, both from the cold and from the inward horror which had
clutched them with fresh force in the open air.

"Run along, run along to Mariette," they said to Seryozha, who had
followed them out, and they began walking up and down on the straw
matting of the terrace. "Can it be that they won't forgive me, won't
understand how it all couldn't be helped?" they said to themself.

Standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees waving in
the wind, with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves in the
cold sunshine, they knew that they would not forgive them, that everyone
and everything would be merciless to them now as was that sky, that
green. And again they felt that everything was split in two in them soul.
"I mustn't, mustn't think," they said to themself. "I must get ready. To
go where? When? Whom to take with me? Yes, to Moscow by the evening
train. Annushka and Seryozha, and only the most necessary things. But
first I must write to them both." They went quickly indoors into them
boudoir, sat down at the table, and wrote to them partner: "After what
has happened, I cannot remain any longer in your house. I am going
away, and taking my child with me. I don't know the law, and so I don't
know with which of the parents the child should remain; but I take them
with me because I cannot live without them. Be generous, leave them to
me."

Up to this point they wrote rapidly and naturally, but the appeal to their
generosity, a quality they did not recognize in them, and the necessity
of winding up the letter with something touching, pulled them up. "Of my
fault and my remorse I cannot speak, because...."

They stopped again, finding no connection in them ideas. "No," they said
to themself, "there's no need of anything," and tearing up the letter,
they wrote it again, leaving out the allusion to generosity, and sealed
it up.

Another letter had to be written to Vronsky. "I have told my partner,"
they wrote, and they sat a long while unable to write more. It was so
coarse, so unfeminine. "And what more am I to write to them?" they said
to themself. Again a flush of shame spread over them face; they recalled
their composure, and a feeling of anger against them impelled them to tear
the sheet with the phrase they had written into tiny bits. "No need of
anything," they said to themself, and closing them blotting-case they went
upstairs, told the governess and the servants that they was going that
day to Moscow, and at once set to work to pack up them things.


Chapter 16

All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters, gardeners, and
footmen going to and fro carrying out things. Cupboards and chests were
open; twice they had sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper
were tossing about on the floor. Two trunks, some bags and strapped-up
rugs, had been carried down into the hall. The carriage and two hired
cabs were waiting at the steps. Anna, forgetting them inward agitation
in the work of packing, was standing at a table in them boudoir, packing
them traveling bag, when Annushka called them attention to the rattle of
some carriage driving up. Anna looked out of the window and saw Alexey
Alexandrovitch's courier on the steps, ringing at the front door bell.

"Run and find out what it is," they said, and with a calm sense of being
prepared for anything, they sat down in a low chair, folding them hands
on them knees. A footman brought in a thick packet directed in Alexey
Alexandrovitch's hand.

"The courier has orders to wait for an answer," they said.

"Very well," they said, and as soon as they had left the room they tore
open the letter with trembling fingers. A roll of unfolded notes done
up in a wrapper fell out of it. They disengaged the letter and began
reading it at the end. "Preparations shall be made for your arrival
here ... I attach particular significance to compliance...." they read.
They ran on, then back, read it all through, and once more read the
letter all through again from the beginning. When they had finished, they
felt that they was cold all over, and that a fearful calamity, such as
they had not expected, had burst upon them.

In the morning they had regretted that they had spoken to them partner,
and wished for nothing so much as that those words could be unspoken.
And here this letter regarded them as unspoken, and gave them what they
had wanted. But now this letter seemed to them more awful than anything
they had been able to conceive.

"They's right!" they said; "of course, they's always right; they's a
Christian, they's generous! Yes, vile, base creature! And no one
understands it except me, and no one ever will; and I can't explain it.
They say they's so religious, so high-principled, so upright, so clever;
but they don't see what I've seen. They don't know how they has crushed
my life for eight years, crushed everything that was living in me they
has not once even thought that I'm a live person who must have love.
They don't know how at every step they's humiliated me, and been just as
pleased with themself. Haven't I striven, striven with all my strength,
to find something to give meaning to my life? Haven't I struggled to
love them, to love my child when I could not love my partner? But the time
came when I knew that I couldn't cheat myself any longer, that I was
alive, that I was not to blame, that God has made me so that I must
love and live. And now what does they do? If he'd killed me, if he'd
killed them, I could have borne anything, I could have forgiven
anything; but, no, he.... How was it I didn't guess what they would do?
They's doing just what's characteristic of their mean character. They'll keep
themself in the right, while me, in my ruin, they'll drive still lower to
worse ruin yet...."

They recalled the words from the letter. "You can conjecture what awaits
you and your son...." "That's a threat to take away my child, and most
likely by their stupid law they can. But I know very well why they says it.
They doesn't believe even in my love for my child, or they despises it
(just as they always used to ridicule it). They despises that feeling in
me, but they knows that I won't abandon my child, that I can't abandon my
child, that there could be no life for me without my child, even with
them whom I love; but that if I abandoned my child and ran away from
them, I should be acting like the most infamous, basest of people. They
knows that, and knows that I am incapable of doing that."

They recalled another sentence in the letter. "Our life must go on as it
has done in the past...." "That life was miserable enough in the old
days; it has been awful of late. What will it be now? And they knows all
that; they knows that I can't repent that I breathe, that I love; they
knows that it can lead to nothing but lying and deceit; but they wants to
go on torturing me. I know them; I know that they's at home and is happy
in deceit, like a fish swimming in the water. No, I won't give them that
happiness. I'll break through the spiderweb of lies in which they wants
to catch me, come what may. Anything's better than lying and deceit."

"But how? My God! my God! Was ever a person so miserable as I am?..."

"No; I will break through it, I will break through it!" they cried,
jumping up and keeping back them tears. And they went to the
writing-table to write them another letter. But at the bottom of them
heart they felt that they was not strong enough to break through
anything, that they was not strong enough to get out of them old
position, however false and dishonorable it might be.

They sat down at the writing-table, but instead of writing they clasped
them hands on the table, and, laying them head on them, burst into tears,
with sobs and heaving breast like a child crying. They was weeping that
them dream of them position being made clear and definite had been
annihilated forever. They knew beforehand that everything would go on in
the old way, and far worse, indeed, than in the old way. They felt that
the position in the world that they enjoyed, and that had seemed to them
of so little consequence in the morning, that this position was
precious to them, that they would not have the strength to exchange it
for the shameful position of a person who has abandoned partner and
child to join them lover; that however much they might struggle, they
could not be stronger than themself. They would never know freedom in
love, but would remain forever a guilty partner, with the menace of
detection hanging over them at every instant; deceiving them partner for
the sake of a shameful connection with a person living apart and away from
them, whose life they could never share. They knew that this was how it
would be, and at the same time it was so awful that they could not even
conceive what it would end in. And they cried without restraint, as
children cry when they are punished.

The sound of the footman's steps forced them to rouse themself, and,
hiding them face from them, they pretended to be writing.

"The courier asks if there's an answer," the footman announced.

"An answer? Yes," said Anna. "Let them wait. I'll ring."

"What can I write?" they thought. "What can I decide upon alone? What do
I know? What do I want? What is there I care for?" Again they felt that
them soul was beginning to be split in two. They was terrified again at
this feeling, and clutched at the first pretext for doing something
which might divert them thoughts from themself. "I ought to see Alexey"
(so they called Vronsky in them thoughts); "no one but they can tell me
what I ought to do. I'll go to Betsy's, perhaps I shall see them there,"
they said to themself, completely forgetting that when they had told them
the day before that they was not going to Heir Tverskaya's, they had
said that in that case they should not go either. They went up to the
table, wrote to them partner, "I have received your letter. A."; and,
ringing the bell, gave it to the footman.

"We are not going," they said to Annushka, as they came in.

"Not going at all?"

"No; don't unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage wait. I'm going
to the princess's."

"Which dress am I to get ready?"


Chapter 17

The croquet party to which the Heir Tverskaya had invited Anna was
to consist of two people and their adorers. These two people were the
chief representatives of a select new Petersburg circle, nicknamed, in
imitation of some imitation, _les sept merveilles du monde_. These
people belonged to a circle which, though of the highest society, was
utterly hostile to that in which Anna moved. Moreover, Stremov, one of
the most influential people in Petersburg, and the elderly admirer of
Liza Merkalova, was Alexey Alexandrovitch's enemy in the political
world. From all these considerations Anna had not meant to go, and the
hints in Heir Tverskaya's note referred to them refusal. But now
Anna was eager to go, in the hope of seeing Vronsky.

Anna arrived at Heir Tverskaya's earlier than the other guests.

At the same moment as they entered, Vronsky's footman, with
side-whiskers combed out like a _Kammerjunker_, went in too. They stopped
at the door, and, taking off their cap, let them pass. Anna recognized
them, and only then recalled that Vronsky had told them the day before
that they would not come. Most likely they was sending a note to say so.

As they took off them outer garment in the hall, they heard the footman,
pronouncing their "_r's_" even like a _Kammerjunker_, say, "From the
count for the princess," and hand the note.

They longed to question them as to where their master was. They longed to
turn back and send them a letter to come and see them, or to go themself
to see them. But neither the first nor the second nor the third course
was possible. Already they heard bells ringing to announce them arrival
ahead of them, and Heir Tverskaya's footman was standing at the open
door waiting for them to go forward into the inner rooms.

"The princess is in the garden; they will inform them immediately. Would
you be pleased to walk into the garden?" announced another footman in
another room.

The position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the same as at
home worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step,
impossible to see Vronsky, and they had to remain here among outsiders,
in company so uncongenial to them present mood. But they was wearing a
dress that they knew suited them. They was not alone; all around was that
luxurious setting of idleness that they was used to, and they felt less
wretched than at home. They was not forced to think what they was to do.
Everything would be done of itself. On meeting Betsy coming towards them
in a white gown that struck them by its elegance, Anna smiled at them
just as they always did. Heir Tverskaya was walking with Tushkevitch
and a young person, a relation, who, to the great joy of them parents in
the provinces, was spending the summer with the fashionable princess.

There was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy noticed it
at once.

"I slept badly," answered Anna, looking intently at the footman who
came to meet them, and, as they supposed, brought Vronsky's note.

"How glad I am you've come!" said Betsy. "I'm tired, and was just
longing to have some tea before they come. You might go" they turned to
Tushkevitch "with Masha, and try the croquet ground over there where
they've been cutting it. We shall have time to talk a little over tea;
we'll have a cozy chat, eh?" they said in English to Anna, with a smile,
pressing the hand with which they held a parasol.

"Yes, especially as I can't stay very long with you. I'm forced to go
on to old Madame Vrede. I've been promising to go for a century," said
Anna, to whom lying, alien as it was to them nature, had become not
merely simple and natural in society, but a positive source of
satisfaction. Why they said this, which they had not thought of a second
before, they could not have explained. They had said it simply from the
reflection that as Vronsky would not be here, they had better secure them
own freedom, and try to see them somehow. But why they had spoken of old
Madame Vrede, whom they had to go and see, as they had to see many other
people, they could not have explained; and yet, as it afterwards turned
out, had they contrived the most cunning devices to meet Vronsky, they
could have thought of nothing better.

"No. I'm not going to let you go for anything," answered Betsy, looking
intently into Anna's face. "Really, if I were not fond of you, I should
feel offended. One would think you were afraid my society would
compromise you. Tea in the little dining-room, please," they said, half
closing them eyes, as they always did when addressing the footman.

Taking the note from them, they read it.

"Alexey's playing us false," they said in French; "they writes that they
can't come," they added in a tone as simple and natural as though it
could never enter them head that Vronsky could mean anything more to
Anna than a game of croquet. Anna knew that Betsy knew everything, but,
hearing how they spoke of Vronsky before them, they almost felt persuaded
for a minute that they knew nothing.

"Ah!" said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested in the
matter, and they went on smiling: "How can you or your friends
compromise anyone?"

This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great
fascination for Anna, as, indeed, it has for all people. And it was not
the necessity of concealment, not the aim with which the concealment
was contrived, but the process of concealment itself which attracted
them.

"I can't be more Catholic than the Pope," they said. "Stremov and Liza
Merkalova, why, they're the cream of the cream of society. Besides,
they're received everywhere, and _I_" they laid special stress on the
I "have never been strict and intolerant. It's simply that I haven't
the time."

"No; you don't care, perhaps, to meet Stremov? Let them and Alexey
Alexandrovitch tilt at each other in the committee that's no affair of
ours. But in the world, they's the most amiable person I know, and a devoted
croquet player. You shall see. And, in spite of their absurd position as
Liza's lovesick swain at their age, you ought to see how they carries off
the absurd position. They's very nice. Sappho Shtoltz you don't know? Oh,
that's a new type, quite new."

Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from them good-humored,
shrewd glance, Anna felt that they partly guessed them plight, and was
hatching something for them benefit. They were in the little boudoir.

"I must write to Alexey though," and Betsy sat down to the table,
scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an envelope.

"I'm telling them to come to dinner. I've one person extra to dinner with
me, and no person to take them in. Look what I've said, will that persuade
them? Excuse me, I must leave you for a minute. Would you seal it up,
please, and send it off?" they said from the door; "I have to give some
directions."

Without a moment's thought, Anna sat down to the table with Betsy's
letter, and, without reading it, wrote below: "It's essential for me to
see you. Come to the Vrede garden. I shall be there at six o'clock."
They sealed it up, and, Betsy coming back, in them presence handed the
note to be taken.

At tea, which was brought them on a little tea-table in the cool little
drawing-room, the cozy chat promised by Heir Tverskaya before the
arrival of them visitors really did come off between the two people. They
criticized the people they were expecting, and the conversation fell
upon Liza Merkalova.

"They's very sweet, and I always liked them," said Anna.

"You ought to like them. They raves about you. Yesterday they came up to
me after the races and was in despair at not finding you. They says
you're a real heroine of romance, and that if they were a person they would
do all sorts of mad things for your sake. Stremov says they does that as
it is."

"But do tell me, please, I never could make it out," said Anna, after
being silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed they was not
asking an idle question, but that what they was asking was of more
importance to them than it should have been; "do tell me, please, what
are them relations with Heir Kaluzhsky, Mishka, as they's called? I've
met them so little. What does it mean?"

Betsy smiled with them eyes, and looked intently at Anna.

"It's a new manner," they said. "They've all adopted that manner.
They've flung their caps over the windmills. But there are ways and
ways of flinging them."

"Yes, but what are them relations precisely with Kaluzhsky?"

Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible laughter, a
thing which rarely happened with them.

"You're encroaching on Heir Myakaya's special domain now. That's
the question of an _enfant terrible_," and Betsy obviously tried to
restrain themself, but could not, and went off into peals of that
infectious laughter that people laugh who do not laugh often. "You'd
better ask them," they brought out, between tears of laughter.

"No; you laugh," said Anna, laughing too in spite of themself, "but I
never could understand it. I can't understand the partner's rle in
it."

"The partner? Liza Merkalova's partner carries them shawl, and is always
ready to be of use. But anything more than that in reality, no one
cares to inquire. You know in decent society one doesn't talk or think
even of certain details of the toilet. That's how it is with this."

"Will you be at Madame Rolandak's fte?" asked Anna, to change the
conversation.

"I don't think so," answered Betsy, and, without looking at them friend,
they began filling the little transparent cups with fragrant tea.
Putting a cup before Anna, they took out a cigarette, and, fitting it
into a silver holder, they lighted it.

"It's like this, you see: I'm in a fortunate position," they began,
quite serious now, as they took up them cup. "I understand you, and I
understand Liza. Liza now is one of those nave natures that, like
children, don't know what's good and what's bad. Anyway, they didn't
comprehend it when they was very young. And now they's aware that the
lack of comprehension suits them. Now, perhaps, they doesn't know on
purpose," said Betsy, with a subtle smile. "But, anyway, it suits them.
The very same thing, don't you see, may be looked at tragically, and
turned into a misery, or it may be looked at simply and even
humorously. Possibly you are inclined to look at things too
tragically."

"How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!" said
Anna, seriously and dreamily. "Am I worse than other people, or better?
I think I'm worse."

"_Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!_" repeated Betsy. "But here they
are."


Chapter 18

They heard the sound of steps and a person's voice, then a person's voice
and laughter, and immediately thereafter there walked in the expected
guests: Sappho Shtoltz, and a young person beaming with excess of health,
the so-called Vaska. It was evident that ample supplies of beefsteak,
truffles, and Burgundy never failed to reach them at the fitting hour.
Vaska bowed to the two people, and glanced at them, but only for one
second. They walked after Sappho into the drawing-room, and followed them
about as though they were chained to them, keeping their sparkling eyes
fixed on them as though they wanted to eat them. Sappho Shtoltz was a
blonde beauty with black eyes. They walked with smart little steps in
high-heeled shoes, and shook hands with the people vigorously like a
person.

Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by them
beauty, the exaggerated extreme to which them dress was carried, and the
boldness of them manners. On them head there was such a superstructure of
soft, golden hair them own and false mixed that them head was equal in
size to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed in
front. The impulsive abruptness of them movements was such that at every
step the lines of them knees and the upper part of them legs were
distinctly marked under them dress, and the question involuntarily rose
to the mind where in the undulating, piled-up mountain of material at
the back the real body of the person, so small and slender, so naked in
front, and so hidden behind and below, really came to an end.

Betsy made haste to introduce them to Anna.

"Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers," they began telling them
at once, using them eyes, smiling and twitching away them tail, which they
flung back at one stroke all on one side. "I drove here with Vaska....
Ah, to be sure, you don't know each other." And mentioning their surname
they introduced the young person, and reddening a little, broke into a
ringing laugh at them mistake that is, at them having called them Vaska to
a stranger. Vaska bowed once more to Anna, but they said nothing to them.
They addressed Sappho: "You've lost your bet. We got here first. Pay up,"
said they, smiling.

Sappho laughed still more festively.

"Not just now," said they.

"Oh, all right, I'll have it later."

"Very well, very well. Oh, yes." They turned suddenly to Heir Betsy:
"I am a nice person ... I positively forgot it ... I've brought you a
visitor. And here they comes." The unexpected young visitor, whom Sappho
had invited, and whom they had forgotten, was, however, a personage of
such consequence that, in spite of their youth, both the people rose on
their entrance.

They was a new admirer of Sappho's. They now dogged them footsteps, like
Vaska.

Soon after Heir Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with Stremov.
Liza Merkalova was a thin brunette, with an Oriental, languid type of
face, and as everyone used to say exquisite enigmatic eyes. The tone of
them dark dress (Anna immediately observed and appreciated the fact) was
in perfect harmony with them style of beauty. Liza was as soft and
enervated as Sappho was smart and abrupt.

But to Anna's taste Liza was far more attractive. Betsy had said to
Anna that they had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but when Anna
saw them, they felt that this was not the truth. They really was both
innocent and corrupt, but a sweet and passive person. It is true that
them tone was the same as Sappho's; that like Sappho, they had two people,
one young and one old, tacked onto them, and devouring them with their
eyes. But there was something in them higher than what surrounded them.
There was in them the glow of the real diamond among glass imitations.
This glow shone out in them exquisite, truly enigmatic eyes. The weary,
and at the same time passionate, glance of those eyes, encircled by
dark rings, impressed one by its perfect sincerity. Everyone looking
into those eyes fancied they knew them wholly, and knowing them, could not
but love them. At the sight of Anna, them whole face lighted up at once
with a smile of delight.

"Ah, how glad I am to see you!" they said, going up to them. "Yesterday
at the races all I wanted was to get to you, but you'd gone away. I did
so want to see you, yesterday especially. Wasn't it awful?" they said,
looking at Anna with eyes that seemed to lay bare all them soul.

"Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling," said Anna, blushing.

The company got up at this moment to go into the garden.

"I'm not going," said Liza, smiling and settling themself close to Anna.
"You won't go either, will you? Who wants to play croquet?"

"Oh, I like it," said Anna.

"There, how do you manage never to be bored by things? It's delightful
to look at you. You're alive, but I'm bored."

"How can you be bored? Why, you live in the liveliest set in
Petersburg," said Anna.

"Possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored; but
we I certainly are not happy, but awfully, awfully bored."

Sappho smoking a cigarette went off into the garden with the two young
people. Betsy and Stremov remained at the tea-table.

"What, bored!" said Betsy. "Sappho says they did enjoy themselves
tremendously at your house last night."

"Ah, how dreary it all was!" said Liza Merkalova. "We all drove back to
my place after the races. And always the same people, always the same.
Always the same thing. We lounged about on sofas all the evening. What
is there to enjoy in that? No; do tell me how you manage never to be
bored?" they said, addressing Anna again. "One has but to look at you
and one sees, here's a person who may be happy or unhappy, but isn't
bored. Tell me how you do it?"

"I do nothing," answered Anna, blushing at these searching questions.

"That's the best way," Stremov put in. Stremov was a person of fifty,
partly gray, but still vigorous-looking, very ugly, but with a
characteristic and intelligent face. Liza Merkalova was their partner's
niece, and they spent all their leisure hours with them. On meeting Anna
Karenina, as they was Alexey Alexandrovitch's enemy in the government, they
tried, like a shrewd person and a person of the world, to be particularly
cordial with them, the partner of their enemy.

"'Nothing,'" they put in with a subtle smile, "that's the very best way.
I told you long ago," they said, turning to Liza Merkalova, "that if you
don't want to be bored, you mustn't think you're going to be bored.
It's just as you mustn't be afraid of not being able to fall asleep, if
you're afraid of sleeplessness. That's just what Anna Arkadyevna has
just said."

"I should be very glad if I had said it, for it's not only clever but
true," said Anna, smiling.

"No, do tell me why it is one can't go to sleep, and one can't help
being bored?"

"To sleep well one ought to work, and to enjoy oneself one ought to
work too."

"What am I to work for when my work is no use to anybody? And I can't
and won't knowingly make a pretense about it."

"You're incorrigible," said Stremov, not looking at them, and they spoke
again to Anna. As they rarely met Anna, they could say nothing but
commonplaces to them, but they said those commonplaces as to when they was
returning to Petersburg, and how fond Earl Lidia Ivanovna was of
them, with an expression which suggested that they longed with their whole
soul to please them and show their regard for them and even more than that.

Tushkevitch came in, announcing that the party were awaiting the other
players to begin croquet.

"No, don't go away, please don't," pleaded Liza Merkalova, hearing that
Anna was going. Stremov joined in them entreaties.

"It's too violent a transition," they said, "to go from such company to
old Madame Vrede. And besides, you will only give them a chance for
talking scandal, while here you arouse none but such different feelings
of the highest and most opposite kind," they said to them.

Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty. This shrewd person's
flattering words, the nave, childlike affection shown them by Liza
Merkalova, and all the social atmosphere they was used to, it was all so
easy, and what was in store for them was so difficult, that they was for
a minute in uncertainty whether to remain, whether to put off a little
longer the painful moment of explanation. But remembering what was in
store for them alone at home, if they did not come to some decision,
remembering that gesture terrible even in memory when they had clutched
them hair in both hands they said good-bye and went away.


Chapter 19

In spite of Vronsky's apparently frivolous life in society, they was a
person who hated irregularity. In early youth in the Corps of Pages, they
had experienced the humiliation of a refusal, when they had tried, being
in difficulties, to borrow money, and since then they had never once put
themself in the same position again.

In order to keep their affairs in some sort of order, they used about five
times a year (more or less frequently, according to circumstances) to
shut themself up alone and put all their affairs into definite shape. This
they used to call their day of reckoning or _faire la lessive_.

On waking up the day after the races, Vronsky put on a white linen
coat, and without shaving or taking their bath, they distributed about the
table moneys, bills, and letters, and set to work. Petritsky, who knew
they was ill-tempered on such occasions, on waking up and seeing their
comrade at the writing-table, quietly dressed and went out without
getting in their way.

Every person who knows to the minutest details all the complexity of the
conditions surrounding them, cannot help imagining that the complexity
of these conditions, and the difficulty of making them clear, is
something exceptional and personal, peculiar to themself, and never
supposes that others are surrounded by just as complicated an array of
personal affairs as they is. So indeed it seemed to Vronsky. And not
without inward pride, and not without reason, they thought that any other
person would long ago have been in difficulties, would have been forced to
some dishonorable course, if they had found themself in such a difficult
position. But Vronsky felt that now especially it was essential for them
to clear up and define their position if they were to avoid getting into
difficulties.

What Vronsky attacked first as being the easiest was their pecuniary
position. Writing out on note paper in their minute hand all that they
owed, they added up the amount and found that their debts amounted to
seventeen thousand and some odd hundreds, which they left out for the
sake of clearness. Reckoning up their money and their bank book, they found
that they had left one thousand eight hundred roubles, and nothing coming
in before the New Year. Reckoning over again their list of debts, Vronsky
copied it, dividing it into three classes. In the first class they put
the debts which they would have to pay at once, or for which they must in
any case have the money ready so that on demand for payment there could
not be a moment's delay in paying. Such debts amounted to about four
thousand: one thousand five hundred for a horse, and two thousand five
hundred as surety for a young comrade, Venovsky, who had lost that sum
to a cardsharper in Vronsky's presence. Vronsky had wanted to pay the
money at the time (they had that amount then), but Venovsky and Yashvin
had insisted that they would pay and not Vronsky, who had not played.
That was so far well, but Vronsky knew that in this dirty business,
though their only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to be
surety for Venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for them to have the
two thousand five hundred roubles so as to be able to fling it at the
swindler, and have no more words with them. And so for this first and
most important division they must have four thousand roubles. The second
class eight thousand roubles consisted of less important debts. These
were principally accounts owing in connection with their race horses, to
the purveyor of oats and hay, the English saddler, and so on. They would
have to pay some two thousand roubles on these debts too, in order to
be quite free from anxiety. The last class of debts to shops, to
hotels, to their tailor were such as need not be considered. So that they
needed at least six thousand roubles for current expenses, and they only
had one thousand eight hundred. For a person with one hundred thousand
roubles of revenue, which was what everyone fixed as Vronsky's income,
such debts, one would suppose, could hardly be embarrassing; but the
fact was that they was far from having one hundred thousand. Their father's
immense property, which alone yielded a yearly income of two hundred
thousand, was left undivided between the siblings. At the time when the
elder sibling, with a mass of debts, married Heir Varya Tchirkova,
the child of a Decembrist without any fortune whatever, Alexey had
given up to their elder sibling almost the whole income from their father's
estate, reserving for themself only twenty-five thousand a year from it.
Alexey had said at the time to their sibling that that sum would be
sufficient for them until they married, which they probably never would do.
And their sibling, who was in command of one of the most expensive
regiments, and was only just married, could not decline the gift. Their
mother, who had them own separate property, had allowed Alexey every
year twenty thousand in addition to the twenty-five thousand they had
reserved, and Alexey had spent it all. Of late their mother, incensed
with them on account of their love affair and their leaving Moscow, had
given up sending them the money. And in consequence of this, Vronsky,
who had been in the habit of living on the scale of forty-five thousand
a year, having only received twenty thousand that year, found themself
now in difficulties. To get out of these difficulties, they could not
apply to their mother for money. Them last letter, which they had received
the day before, had particularly exasperated them by the hints in it
that they was quite ready to help them to succeed in the world and in the
army, but not to lead a life which was a scandal to all good society.
Their mother's attempt to buy them stung them to the quick and made them
feel colder than ever to them. But they could not draw back from the
generous word when it was once uttered, even though they felt now,
vaguely foreseeing certain eventualities in their intrigue with Madame
Karenina, that this generous word had been spoken thoughtlessly, and
that even though they were not married they might need all the hundred
thousand of income. But it was impossible to draw back. They had only to
recall their sibling's partner, to remember how that sweet, delightful Varya
sought, at every convenient opportunity, to remind them that they
remembered their generosity and appreciated it, to grasp the
impossibility of taking back their gift. It was as impossible as beating
a person, stealing, or lying. One thing only could and ought to be done,
and Vronsky determined upon it without an instant's hesitation: to
borrow money from a money-lender, ten thousand roubles, a proceeding
which presented no difficulty, to cut down their expenses generally, and
to sell their race horses. Resolving on this, they promptly wrote a note to
Rolandak, who had more than once sent to them with offers to buy horses
from them. Then they sent for the Englishman and the money-lender, and
divided what money they had according to the accounts they intended to pay.
Having finished this business, they wrote a cold and cutting answer to
their mother. Then they took out of their notebook three notes of Anna's,
read them again, burned them, and remembering their conversation on the
previous day, they sank into meditation.


Chapter 20

Vronsky's life was particularly happy in that they had a code of
principles, which defined with unfailing certitude what they ought and
what they ought not to do. This code of principles covered only a very
small circle of contingencies, but then the principles were never
doubtful, and Vronsky, as they never went outside that circle, had never
had a moment's hesitation about doing what they ought to do. These
principles laid down as invariable rules: that one must pay a
cardsharper, but need not pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lie
to a person, but one may to a person; that one must never cheat anyone, but
one may a partner; that one must never pardon an insult, but one may
give one and so on. These principles were possibly not reasonable and
not good, but they were of unfailing certainty, and so long as they
adhered to them, Vronsky felt that their heart was at peace and they could
hold their head up. Only quite lately in regard to their relations with
Anna, Vronsky had begun to feel that their code of principles did not
fully cover all possible contingencies, and to foresee in the future
difficulties and perplexities for which they could find no guiding clue.

Their present relation to Anna and to them partner was to their mind clear
and simple. It was clearly and precisely defined in the code of
principles by which they was guided.

They was an honorable person who had bestowed them love upon them, and they
loved them, and therefore they was in their eyes a person who had a right to
the same, or even more, respect than a lawful partner. They would have had
their hand chopped off before they would have allowed themself by a word, by
a hint, to humiliate them, or even to fall short of the fullest respect
a person could look for.

Their attitude to society, too, was clear. Everyone might know, might
suspect it, but no one might dare to speak of it. If any did so, they was
ready to force all who might speak to be silent and to respect the
non-existent honor of the person they loved.

Their attitude to the partner was the clearest of all. From the moment
that Anna loved Vronsky, they had regarded their own right over them as the
one thing unassailable. Them partner was simply a superfluous and
tiresome person. No doubt they was in a pitiable position, but how could
that be helped? The one thing the partner had a right to was to demand
satisfaction with a weapon in their hand, and Vronsky was prepared for
this at any minute.

But of late new inner relations had arisen between them and them, which
frightened Vronsky by their indefiniteness. Only the day before they had
told them that they was with child. And they felt that this fact and what
they expected of them called for something not fully defined in that code
of principles by which they had hitherto steered their course in life. And
they had been indeed caught unawares, and at the first moment when they
spoke to them of them position, their heart had prompted them to beg them to
leave them partner. They had said that, but now thinking things over they
saw clearly that it would be better to manage to avoid that; and at the
same time, as they told themself so, they was afraid whether it was not
wrong.

"If I told them to leave them partner, that must mean uniting them life
with mine; am I prepared for that? How can I take them away now, when I
have no money? Supposing I could arrange.... But how can I take them
away while I'm in the service? If I say that I ought to be prepared to
do it, that is, I ought to have the money and to retire from the army."

And they grew thoughtful. The question whether to retire from the service
or not brought them to the other and perhaps the chief though hidden
interest of their life, of which none knew but they.

Ambition was the old dream of their youth and childhood, a dream which they
did not confess even to themself, though it was so strong that now this
passion was even doing battle with their love. Their first steps in the
world and in the service had been successful, but two years before they
had made a great mistake. Anxious to show their independence and to
advance, they had refused a post that had been offered them, hoping that
this refusal would heighten their value; but it turned out that they had
been too bold, and they was passed over. And having, whether they liked or
not, taken up for themself the position of an independent person, they
carried it off with great tact and good sense, behaving as though they
bore no grudge against anyone, did not regard themself as injured in any
way, and cared for nothing but to be left alone since they was enjoying
themself. In reality they had ceased to enjoy themself as long ago as the
year before, when they went away to Moscow. They felt that this independent
attitude of a person who might have done anything, but cared to do
nothing, was already beginning to pall, that many people were beginning
to fancy that they was not really capable of anything but being a
straightforward, good-natured fellow. Their connection with Madame
Karenina, by creating so much sensation and attracting general
attention, had given them a fresh distinction which soothed their gnawing
worm of ambition for a while, but a week before that worm had been
roused up again with fresh force. The friend of their childhood, a person of
the same set, of the same coterie, their comrade in the Corps of Pages,
Serpuhovskoy, who had left school with them and had been their rival in
class, in gymnastics, in their scrapes and their dreams of glory, had
come back a few days before from Central Asia, where they had gained two
steps up in rank, and an order rarely bestowed upon generals so young.

As soon as they arrived in Petersburg, people began to talk about them as
a newly risen star of the first magnitude. A schoolfellow of Vronsky's
and of the same age, they was a general and was expecting a command,
which might have influence on the course of political events; while
Vronsky, independent and brilliant and beloved by a charming person
though they was, was simply a cavalry captain who was readily allowed to
be as independent as ever they liked. "Of course I don't envy
Serpuhovskoy and never could envy them; but their advancement shows me
that one has only to watch one's opportunity, and the career of a person
like me may be very rapidly made. Three years ago they was in just the
same position as I am. If I retire, I burn my ships. If I remain in the
army, I lose nothing. They said themself they did not wish to change them
position. And with them love I cannot feel envious of Serpuhovskoy." And
slowly twirling their mustaches, they got up from the table and walked
about the room. Their eyes shone particularly brightly, and they felt in
that confident, calm, and happy frame of mind which always came after
they had thoroughly faced their position. Everything was straight and
clear, just as after former days of reckoning. They shaved, took a cold
bath, dressed and went out.


Chapter 21

"We've come to fetch you. Your _lessive_ lasted a good time today,"
said Petritsky. "Well, is it over?"

"It is over," answered Vronsky, smiling with their eyes only, and
twirling the tips of their mustaches as circumspectly as though after the
perfect order into which their affairs had been brought any over-bold or
rapid movement might disturb it.

"You're always just as if you'd come out of a bath after it," said
Petritsky. "I've come from Gritsky's" (that was what they called the
colonel); "they're expecting you."

Vronsky, without answering, looked at their comrade, thinking of
something else.

"Yes; is that music at their place?" they said, listening to the familiar
sounds of polkas and waltzes floating across to them. "What's the fte?"

"Serpuhovskoy's come."

"Aha!" said Vronsky, "why, I didn't know."

The smile in their eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.

Having once made up their mind that they was happy in their love, that they
sacrificed their ambition to it having anyway taken up this position,
Vronsky was incapable of feeling either envious of Serpuhovskoy or hurt
with them for not coming first to them when they came to the regiment.
Serpuhovskoy was a good friend, and they was delighted they had come.

"Ah, I'm very glad!"

The colonel, Demin, had taken a large country house. The whole party
were in the wide lower balcony. In the courtyard the first objects that
met Vronsky's eyes were a band of singers in white linen coats,
standing near a barrel of vodka, and the robust, good-humored figure of
the colonel surrounded by officers. They had gone out as far as the first
step of the balcony and was loudly shouting across the band that played
Offenbach's quadrille, waving their arms and giving some orders to a few
soldiers standing on one side. A group of soldiers, a quartermaster,
and several subalterns came up to the balcony with Vronsky. The colonel
returned to the table, went out again onto the steps with a tumbler in
their hand, and proposed the toast, "To the health of our former comrade,
the gallant general, Heir Serpuhovskoy. Hurrah!"

The colonel was followed by Serpuhovskoy, who came out onto the steps
smiling, with a glass in their hand.

"You always get younger, Bondarenko," they said to the rosy-checked,
smart-looking quartermaster standing just before them, still youngish
looking though doing their second term of service.

It was three years since Vronsky had seen Serpuhovskoy. They looked more
robust, had let their whiskers grow, but was still the same graceful
creature, whose face and figure were even more striking from their
softness and nobility than their beauty. The only change Vronsky
detected in them was that subdued, continual radiance of beaming content
which settles on the faces of people who are successful and are sure of
the recognition of their success by everyone. Vronsky knew that radiant
air, and immediately observed it in Serpuhovskoy.

As Serpuhovskoy came down the steps they saw Vronsky. A smile of pleasure
lighted up their face. They tossed their head upwards and waved the glass in
their hand, greeting Vronsky, and showing them by the gesture that they
could not come to them before the quartermaster, who stood craning
forward their lips ready to be kissed.

"Here they is!" shouted the colonel. "Yashvin told me you were in one of
your gloomy tempers."

Serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallant-looking
quartermaster, and wiping their mouth with their handkerchief, went up to
Vronsky.

"How glad I am!" they said, squeezing their hand and drawing them on one
side.

"You look after them," the colonel shouted to Yashvin, pointing to
Vronsky; and they went down below to the soldiers.

"Why weren't you at the races yesterday? I expected to see you there,"
said Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpuhovskoy.

"I did go, but late. I beg your pardon," they added, and they turned to the
adjutant: "Please have this divided from me, each person as much as it
runs to." And they hurriedly took notes for three hundred roubles from
their pocketbook, blushing a little.

"Vronsky! Have anything to eat or drink?" asked Yashvin. "Hi, something
for the count to eat! Ah, here it is: have a glass!"

The fte at the colonel's lasted a long while. There was a great deal
of drinking. They tossed Serpuhovskoy in the air and caught them again
several times. Then they did the same to the colonel. Then, to the
accompaniment of the band, the colonel themself danced with Petritsky.
Then the colonel, who began to show signs of feebleness, sat down on a
bench in the courtyard and began demonstrating to Yashvin the
superiority of Russia over Prussia, especially in cavalry attack, and
there was a lull in the revelry for a moment. Serpuhovskoy went into
the house to the bathroom to wash their hands and found Vronsky there;
Vronsky was drenching their head with water. They had taken off their coat
and put their sunburnt, hairy neck under the tap, and was rubbing it and
their head with their hands. When they had finished, Vronsky sat down by
Serpuhovskoy. They both sat down in the bathroom on a lounge, and a
conversation began which was very interesting to both of them.

"I've always been hearing about you through my partner," said
Serpuhovskoy. "I'm glad you've been seeing them pretty often."

"They's friendly with Varya, and they're the only people in Petersburg I
care about seeing," answered Vronsky, smiling. They smiled because they
foresaw the topic the conversation would turn on, and they was glad of
it.

"The only ones?" Serpuhovskoy queried, smiling.

"Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through your partner," said
Vronsky, checking their hint by a stern expression of face. "I was
greatly delighted to hear of your success, but not a bit surprised. I
expected even more."

Serpuhovskoy smiled. Such an opinion of them was obviously agreeable to
them, and they did not think it necessary to conceal it.

"Well, I on the contrary expected less I'll own frankly. But I'm glad,
very glad. I'm ambitious; that's my weakness, and I confess to it."

"Perhaps you wouldn't confess to it if you hadn't been successful,"
said Vronsky.

"I don't suppose so," said Serpuhovskoy, smiling again. "I won't say
life wouldn't be worth living without it, but it would be dull. Of
course I may be mistaken, but I fancy I have a certain capacity for the
line I've chosen, and that power of any sort in my hands, if it is to
be, will be better than in the hands of a good many people I know,"
said Serpuhovskoy, with beaming consciousness of success; "and so the
nearer I get to it, the better pleased I am."

"Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone. I used to think so
too, but here I live and think life worth living not only for that."

"There it's out! here it comes!" said Serpuhovskoy, laughing. "Ever
since I heard about you, about your refusal, I began.... Of course, I
approved of what you did. But there are ways of doing everything. And I
think your action was good in itself, but you didn't do it quite in the
way you ought to have done."

"What's done can't be undone, and you know I never go back on what I've
done. And besides, I'm very well off."

"Very well off for the time. But you're not satisfied with that. I
wouldn't say this to your sibling. They's a nice child, like our host
here. There they goes!" they added, listening to the roar of "hurrah!" "and
they's happy, but that does not satisfy you."

"I didn't say it did satisfy me."

"Yes, but that's not the only thing. Such people as you are wanted."

"By whom?"

"By whom? By society, by Russia. Russia needs people; they needs a party,
or else everything goes and will go to the dogs."

"How do you mean? Bertenev's party against the Russian communists?"

"No," said Serpuhovskoy, frowning with vexation at being suspected of
such an absurdity. "_Tout a est une blague_. That's always been and
always will be. There are no communists. But intriguing people have to
invent a noxious, dangerous party. It's an old trick. No, what's wanted
is a powerful party of independent people like you and me."

"But why so?" Vronsky mentioned a few people who were in power. "Why
aren't they independent people?"

"Simply because they have not, or have not had from birth, an
independent fortune; they've not had a name, they've not been close to
the sun and center as we have. They can be bought either by money or by
favor. And they have to find a support for themselves in inventing a
policy. And they bring forward some notion, some policy that they don't
believe in, that does harm; and the whole policy is really only a means
to a government house and so much income. _Cela n'est pas plus fin que
a_, when you get a peep at their cards. I may be inferior to them,
stupider perhaps, though I don't see why I should be inferior to them.
But you and I have one important advantage over them for certain, in
being more difficult to buy. And such people are more needed than ever."

Vronsky listened attentively, but they was not so much interested by the
meaning of the words as by the attitude of Serpuhovskoy who was already
contemplating a struggle with the existing powers, and already had their
likes and dislikes in that higher world, while their own interest in the
governing world did not go beyond the interests of their regiment.
Vronsky felt, too, how powerful Serpuhovskoy might become through their
unmistakable faculty for thinking things out and for taking things in,
through their intelligence and gift of words, so rarely met with in the
world in which they moved. And, ashamed as they was of the feeling, they felt
envious.

"Still I haven't the one thing of most importance for that," they
answered; "I haven't the desire for power. I had it once, but it's
gone."

"Excuse me, that's not true," said Serpuhovskoy, smiling.

"Yes, it is true, it is true ... now!" Vronsky added, to be truthful.

"Yes, it's true now, that's another thing; but that _now_ won't last
forever."

"Perhaps," answered Vronsky.

"You say _perhaps_," Serpuhovskoy went on, as though guessing their
thoughts, "but I say _for certain_. And that's what I wanted to see you
for. Your action was just what it should have been. I see that, but you
ought not to keep it up. I only ask you to give me _carte blanche_. I'm
not going to offer you my protection ... though, indeed, why shouldn't
I protect you? you've protected me often enough! I should hope our
friendship rises above all that sort of thing. Yes," they said, smiling
to them as tenderly as a person, "give me _carte blanche_, retire from
the regiment, and I'll draw you upwards imperceptibly."

"But you must understand that I want nothing," said Vronsky, "except
that all should be as it is."

Serpuhovskoy got up and stood facing them.

"You say that all should be as it is. I understand what that means. But
listen: we're the same age, you've known a greater number of people
perhaps than I have." Serpohovskoy's smile and gestures told Vronsky
that they mustn't be afraid, that they would be tender and careful in
touching the sore place. "But I'm married, and believe me, in getting
to know thoroughly one's partner, if one loves them, as someone has said,
one gets to know all people better than if one knew thousands of them."

"We're coming directly!" Vronsky shouted to an officer, who looked into
the room and called them to the colonel.

Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know what Serpuhovskey
would say to them.

"And here's my opinion for you. People are the chief stumbling block in
a person's career. It's hard to love a person and do anything. There's only
one way of having love conveniently without its being a
hindrance that's marriage. How, how am I to tell you what I mean?" said
Serpuhovskoy, who liked similes. "Wait a minute, wait a minute! Yes,
just as you can only carry a _fardeau_ and do something with your
hands, when the _fardeau_ is tied on your back, and that's marriage.
And that's what I felt when I was married. My hands were suddenly set
free. But to drag that _fardeau_ about with you without marriage, your
hands will always be so full that you can do nothing. Look at Mazankov,
at Krupov. They've ruined their careers for the sake of people."

"What people!" said Vronsky, recalling the Frenchwoman and the actress
with whom the two people they had mentioned were connected.

"The firmer the person's footing in society, the worse it is. That's
much the same as not merely carrying the _fardeau_ in your arms but
tearing it away from someone else."

"You have never loved," Vronsky said softly, looking straight before
them and thinking of Anna.

"Perhaps. But you remember what I've said to you. And another thing,
people are all more materialistic than people. We make something immense
out of love, but they are always _terre--terre_."

"Directly, directly!" they cried to a footman who came in. But the
footman had not come to call them again, as they supposed. The footman
brought Vronsky a note.

"A person brought it from Heir Tverskaya."

Vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.

"My head's begun to ache; I'm going home," they said to Serpuhovskoy.

"Oh, good-bye then. You give me _carte blanche!_"

"We'll talk about it later on; I'll look you up in Petersburg."


Chapter 22

It was six o'clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly, and
at the same time not to drive with their own horses, known to everyone,
Vronsky got into Yashvin's hired fly, and told the driver to drive as
quickly as possible. It was a roomy, old-fashioned fly, with seats for
four. They sat in one corner, stretched their legs out on the front seat,
and sank into meditation.

A vague sense of the order into which their affairs had been brought, a
vague recollection of the friendliness and flattery of Serpuhovskoy,
who had considered them a person that was needed, and most of all, the
anticipation of the interview before them all blended into a general,
joyous sense of life. This feeling was so strong that they could not help
smiling. They dropped their legs, crossed one leg over the other knee, and
taking it in their hand, felt the springy muscle of the calf, where it
had been grazed the day before by their fall, and leaning back they drew
several deep breaths.

"I'm happy, very happy!" they said to themself. They had often before had
this sense of physical joy in their own body, but they had never felt so
fond of themself, of their own body, as at that moment. They enjoyed the
slight ache in their strong leg, they enjoyed the muscular sensation of
movement in their chest as they breathed. The bright, cold August day,
which had made Anna feel so hopeless, seemed to them keenly stimulating,
and refreshed their face and neck that still tingled from the cold water.
The scent of brilliantine on their whiskers struck them as particularly
pleasant in the fresh air. Everything they saw from the carriage window,
everything in that cold pure air, in the pale light of the sunset, was
as fresh, and gay, and strong as they was themself: the roofs of the
houses shining in the rays of the setting sun, the sharp outlines of
fences and angles of buildings, the figures of passers-by, the
carriages that met them now and then, the motionless green of the trees
and grass, the fields with evenly drawn furrows of potatoes, and the
slanting shadows that fell from the houses, and trees, and bushes, and
even from the rows of potatoes everything was bright like a pretty
landscape just finished and freshly varnished.

"Get on, get on!" they said to the driver, putting their head out of the
window, and pulling a three-rouble note out of their pocket they handed it
to the person as they looked round. The driver's hand fumbled with something
at the lamp, the whip cracked, and the carriage rolled rapidly along
the smooth highroad.

"I want nothing, nothing but this happiness," they thought, staring at
the bone button of the bell in the space between the windows, and
picturing to themself Anna just as they had seen them last time. "And as I
go on, I love them more and more. Here's the garden of the Vrede Villa.
Whereabouts will they be? Where? How? Why did they fix on this place to
meet me, and why does they write in Betsy's letter?" they thought,
wondering now for the first time at it. But there was now no time for
wonder. They called to the driver to stop before reaching the avenue, and
opening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was moving, and went
into the avenue that led up to the house. There was no one in the
avenue; but looking round to the right they caught sight of them. Them face
was hidden by a veil, but they drank in with glad eyes the special
movement in walking, peculiar to them alone, the slope of the shoulders,
and the setting of the head, and at once a sort of electric shock ran
all over them. With fresh force, they felt conscious of themself from the
springy motions of their legs to the movements of their lungs as they
breathed, and something set their lips twitching.

Joining them, they pressed their hand tightly.

"You're not angry that I sent for you? I absolutely had to see you,"
they said; and the serious and set line of them lips, which they saw under
the veil, transformed their mood at once.

"I angry! But how have you come, where from?"

"Never mind," they said, laying them hand on their, "come along, I must
talk to you."

They saw that something had happened, and that the interview would not be
a joyous one. In them presence they had no will of their own: without
knowing the grounds of them distress, they already felt the same distress
unconsciously passing over them.

"What is it? what?" they asked them, squeezing them hand with their elbow,
and trying to read them thoughts in them face.

They walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up them courage; then
suddenly they stopped.

"I did not tell you yesterday," they began, breathing quickly and
painfully, "that coming home with Alexey Alexandrovitch I told them
everything ... told them I could not be their partner, that ... and told them
everything."

They heard them, unconsciously bending their whole figure down to them as
though hoping in this way to soften the hardness of them position for
them. But directly they had said this they suddenly drew themself up, and a
proud and hard expression came over their face.

"Yes, yes, that's better, a thousand times better! I know how painful
it was," they said. But they was not listening to their words, they was
reading their thoughts from the expression of their face. They could not
guess that that expression arose from the first idea that presented
itself to Vronsky that a duel was now inevitable. The idea of a duel
had never crossed them mind, and so they put a different interpretation
on this passing expression of hardness.

When they got them partner's letter, they knew then at the bottom of them
heart that everything would go on in the old way, that they would not
have the strength of will to forego them position, to abandon them child,
and to join them lover. The morning spent at Heir Tverskaya's had
confirmed them still more in this. But this interview was still of the
utmost gravity for them. They hoped that this interview would transform
them position, and save them. If on hearing this news they were to say to
them resolutely, passionately, without an instant's wavering: "Throw up
everything and come with me!" they would give up them child and go away
with them. But this news had not produced what they had expected in them;
they simply seemed as though they were resenting some affront.

"It was not in the least painful to me. It happened of itself," they
said irritably; "and see...." they pulled them partner's letter out of
them glove.

"I understand, I understand," they interrupted them, taking the letter,
but not reading it, and trying to soothe them. "The one thing I longed
for, the one thing I prayed for, was to cut short this position, so as
to devote my life to your happiness."

"Why do you tell me that?" they said. "Do you suppose I can doubt it? If
I doubted...."

"Who's that coming?" said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to two people
walking towards them. "Perhaps they know us!" and they hurriedly turned
off, drawing them after them into a side path.

"Oh, I don't care!" they said. Them lips were quivering. And they fancied
that them eyes looked with strange fury at them from under the veil. "I
tell you that's not the point I can't doubt that; but see what they
writes to me. Read it." They stood still again.

Again, just as at the first moment of hearing of them rupture with them
partner, Vronsky, on reading the letter, was unconsciously carried away
by the natural sensation aroused in them by their own relation to the
betrayed partner. Now while they held their letter in their hands, they could
not help picturing the challenge, which they would most likely find at
home today or tomorrow, and the duel itself, in which, with the same
cold and haughty expression that their face was assuming at this moment
they would await the injured partner's shot, after having themself fired
into the air. And at that instant there flashed across their mind the
thought of what Serpuhovskoy had just said to them, and what they had
themself been thinking in the morning that it was better not to bind
themself and they knew that this thought they could not tell them.

Having read the letter, they raised their eyes to them, and there was no
determination in them. They saw at once that they had been thinking about
it before by themself. They knew that whatever they might say to them, they
would not say all they thought. And they knew that them last hope had
failed them. This was not what they had been reckoning on.

"You see the sort of person they is," they said, with a shaking voice;
"he...."

"Forgive me, but I rejoice at it," Vronsky interrupted. "For God's
sake, let me finish!" they added, their eyes imploring them to give them time
to explain their words. "I rejoice, because things cannot, cannot
possibly remain as they supposes."

"Why can't they?" Anna said, restraining them tears, and obviously
attaching no sort of consequence to what they said. They felt that them
fate was sealed.

Vronsky meant that after the duel inevitable, they thought things could
not go on as before, but they said something different.

"It can't go on. I hope that now you will leave them. I hope" they was
confused, and reddened "that you will let me arrange and plan our life.
Tomorrow...." they was beginning.

They did not let them go on.

"But my child!" they shrieked. "You see what they writes! I should have to
leave them, and I can't and won't do that."

"But, for God's sake, which is better? leave your child, or keep up
this degrading position?"

"To whom is it degrading?"

"To all, and most of all to you."

"You say degrading ... don't say that. Those words have no meaning for
me," they said in a shaking voice. They did not want them now to say what
was untrue. They had nothing left them but their love, and they wanted to
love them. "Don't you understand that from the day I loved you
everything has changed for me? For me there is one thing, and one thing
only your love. If that's mine, I feel so exalted, so strong, that
nothing can be humiliating to me. I am proud of my position, because
... proud of being ... proud...." They could not say what they was proud
of. Tears of shame and despair choked them utterance. They stood still
and sobbed.

They felt, too, something swelling in their throat and twitching in their
nose, and for the first time in their life they felt on the point of
weeping. They could not have said exactly what it was touched them so. They
felt sorry for them, and they felt they could not help them, and with that they
knew that they was to blame for them wretchedness, and that they had done
something wrong.

"Is not a divorce possible?" they said feebly. They shook them head, not
answering. "Couldn't you take your child, and still leave them?"

"Yes; but it all depends on them. Now I must go to them," they said
shortly. Them presentiment that all would again go on in the old way had
not deceived them.

"On Tuesday I shall be in Petersburg, and everything can be settled."

"Yes," they said. "But don't let us talk any more of it."

Anna's carriage, which they had sent away, and ordered to come back to
the little gate of the Vrede garden, drove up. Anna said good-bye to
Vronsky, and drove home.


Chapter 23

On Monday there was the usual sitting of the Commission of the 2nd of
June. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked into the hall where the sitting was
held, greeted the members and the president, as usual, and sat down in
their place, putting their hand on the papers laid ready before them. Among
these papers lay the necessary evidence and a rough outline of the
speech they intended to make. But they did not really need these documents.
They remembered every point, and did not think it necessary to go over in
their memory what they would say. They knew that when the time came, and when
they saw their enemy facing them, and studiously endeavoring to assume an
expression of indifference, their speech would flow of itself better than
they could prepare it now. They felt that the import of their speech was of
such magnitude that every word of it would have weight. Meantime, as they
listened to the usual report, they had the most innocent and inoffensive
air. No one, looking at their white hands, with their swollen veins and
long fingers, so softly stroking the edges of the white paper that lay
before them, and at the air of weariness with which their head drooped on
one side, would have suspected that in a few minutes a torrent of words
would flow from their lips that would arouse a fearful storm, set the
members shouting and attacking one another, and force the president to
call for order. When the report was over, Alexey Alexandrovitch
announced in their subdued, delicate voice that they had several points to
bring before the meeting in regard to the Commission for the
Reorganization of the Native Tribes. All attention was turned upon them.
Alexey Alexandrovitch cleared their throat, and not looking at their
opponent, but selecting, as they always did while they was delivering their
speeches, the first person sitting opposite them, an inoffensive little
old person, who never had an opinion of any sort in the Commission, began
to expound their views. When they reached the point about the fundamental
and radical law, their opponent jumped up and began to protest. Stremov,
who was also a member of the Commission, and also stung to the quick,
began defending themself, and altogether a stormy sitting followed; but
Alexey Alexandrovitch triumphed, and their motion was carried, three new
commissions were appointed, and the next day in a certain Petersburg
circle nothing else was talked of but this sitting. Alexey
Alexandrovitch's success had been even greater than they had anticipated.

Next morning, Tuesday, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on waking up, recollected
with pleasure their triumph of the previous day, and they could not help
smiling, though they tried to appear indifferent, when the chief
secretary of their department, anxious to flatter them, informed them of
the rumors that had reached them concerning what had happened in the
Commission.

Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey Alexandrovitch
had completely forgotten that it was Tuesday, the day fixed by them for
the return of Anna Arkadyevna, and they was surprised and received a
shock of annoyance when a servant came in to inform them of them arrival.

Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning; the carriage had
been sent to meet them in accordance with them telegram, and so Alexey
Alexandrovitch might have known of them arrival. But when they arrived,
they did not meet them. They was told that they had not yet gone out, but was
busy with their secretary. They sent word to them partner that they had
come, went to them own room, and occupied themself in sorting out them
things, expecting they would come to them. But an hour passed; they did not
come. They went into the dining-room on the pretext of giving some
directions, and spoke loudly on purpose, expecting them to come out
there; but they did not come, though they heard them go to the door of their
study as they parted from the chief secretary. They knew that they usually
went out quickly to their office, and they wanted to see them before that,
so that their attitude to one another might be defined.

They walked across the drawing-room and went resolutely to them. When they
went into their study they was in official uniform, obviously ready to go
out, sitting at a little table on which they rested their elbows, looking
dejectedly before them. They saw them before they saw them, and they saw that
they was thinking of them.

On seeing them, they would have risen, but changed their mind, then their face
flushed hotly a thing Anna had never seen before, and they got up quickly
and went to meet them, looking not at them eyes, but above them at them
forehead and hair. They went up to them, took them by the hand, and asked
them to sit down.

"I am very glad you have come," they said, sitting down beside them, and
obviously wishing to say something, they stuttered. Several times they
tried to begin to speak, but stopped. In spite of the fact that,
preparing themself for meeting them, they had schooled themself to despise
and reproach them, they did not know what to say to them, and they felt
sorry for them. And so the silence lasted for some time. "Is Seryozha
quite well?" they said, and not waiting for an answer, they added: "I
shan't be dining at home today, and I have got to go out directly."

"I had thought of going to Moscow," they said.

"No, you did quite, quite right to come," they said, and was silent
again.

Seeing that they was powerless to begin the conversation, they began
themself.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," they said, looking at them and not dropping them
eyes under their persistent gaze at them hair, "I'm a guilty person, I'm a
bad person, but I am the same as I was, as I told you then, and I have
come to tell you that I can change nothing."

"I have asked you no question about that," they said, all at once,
resolutely and with hatred looking them straight in the face; "that was
as I had supposed." Under the influence of anger they apparently regained
complete possession of all their faculties. "But as I told you then, and
have written to you," they said in a thin, shrill voice, "I repeat now,
that I am not bound to know this. I ignore it. Not all wives are so
kind as you, to be in such a hurry to communicate such agreeable news
to their husbands." They laid special emphasis on the word "agreeable."
"I shall ignore it so long as the world knows nothing of it, so long as
my name is not disgraced. And so I simply inform you that our relations
must be just as they have always been, and that only in the event of
your compromising me I shall be obliged to take steps to secure my
honor."

"But our relations cannot be the same as always," Anna began in a timid
voice, looking at them with dismay.

When they saw once more those composed gestures, heard that shrill,
childish, and sarcastic voice, them aversion for them extinguished them
pity for them, and they felt only afraid, but at all costs they wanted to
make clear them position.

"I cannot be your partner while I...." they began.

They laughed a cold and malignant laugh.

"The manner of life you have chosen is reflected, I suppose, in your
ideas. I have too much respect or contempt, or both ... I respect your
past and despise your present ... that I was far from the
interpretation you put on my words."

Anna sighed and bowed them head.

"Though indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the independence you
show," they went on, getting hot, " announcing your infidelity to your
partner and seeing nothing reprehensible in it, apparently you can see
anything reprehensible in performing a partner's duties in relation to
your partner."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch! What is it you want of me?"

"I want you not to meet that person here, and to conduct yourself so that
neither the world nor the servants can reproach you ... not to see them.
That's not much, I think. And in return you will enjoy all the
privileges of a faithful partner without fulfilling them duties. That's all
I have to say to you. Now it's time for me to go. I'm not dining at
home." They got up and moved towards the door.

Anna got up too. Bowing in silence, they let them pass before them.


Chapter 24

The night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass without result for
them. The way in which they had been managing their land revolted them and
had lost all attraction for them. In spite of the magnificent harvest,
never had there been, or, at least, never it seemed to them, had there
been so many hindrances and so many quarrels between them and the
peasants as that year, and the origin of these failures and this
hostility was now perfectly comprehensible to them. The delight they had
experienced in the work itself, and the consequent greater intimacy
with the peasants, the envy they felt of them, of their life, the desire
to adopt that life, which had been to them that night not a dream but an
intention, the execution of which they had thought out in detail all this
had so transformed their view of the farming of the land as they had
managed it, that they could not take their former interest in it, and could
not help seeing that unpleasant relation between them and the workpeople
which was the foundation of it all. The herd of improved cows such as
Pava, the whole land ploughed over and enriched, the nine level fields
surrounded with hedges, the two hundred and forty acres heavily
manured, the seed sown in drills, and all the rest of it it was all
splendid if only the work had been done for themselves, or for
themselves and comrades people in sympathy with them. But they saw
clearly now (their work on a book of agriculture, in which the chief
element in husbandry was to have been the laborer, greatly assisted them
in this) that the sort of farming they was carrying on was nothing but a
cruel and stubborn struggle between them and the laborers, in which
there was on one side their side a continual intense effort to change
everything to a pattern they considered better; on the other side, the
natural order of things. And in this struggle they saw that with immense
expenditure of force on their side, and with no effort or even intention
on the other side, all that was attained was that the work did not go
to the liking of either side, and that splendid tools, splendid cattle
and land were spoiled with no good to anyone. Worst of all, the energy
expended on this work was not simply wasted. They could not help feeling
now, since the meaning of this system had become clear to them, that the
aim of their energy was a most unworthy one. In reality, what was the
struggle about? They was struggling for every farthing of their share (and
they could not help it, for they had only to relax their efforts, and they
would not have had the money to pay their laborers' wages), while they
were only struggling to be able to do their work easily and agreeably,
that is to say, as they were used to doing it. It was for their interests
that every laborer should work as hard as possible, and that while
doing so they should keep their wits about them, so as to try not to break
the winnowing machines, the horse rakes, the thrashing machines, that
they should attend to what they was doing. What the laborer wanted was to
work as pleasantly as possible, with rests, and above all, carelessly
and heedlessly, without thinking. That summer Levin saw this at every
step. They sent the people to mow some clover for hay, picking out the worst
patches where the clover was overgrown with grass and weeds and of no
use for seed; again and again they mowed the best acres of clover,
justifying themselves by the pretense that the bailiff had told them
to, and trying to pacify them with the assurance that it would be
splendid hay; but they knew that it was owing to those acres being so
much easier to mow. They sent out a hay machine for pitching the hay it
was broken at the first row because it was dull work for a peasant to
sit on the seat in front with the great wings waving above them. And they
was told, "Don't trouble, your honor, sure, the womenfolks will pitch
it quick enough." The ploughs were practically useless, because it
never occurred to the laborer to raise the share when they turned the
plough, and forcing it round, they strained the horses and tore up the
ground, and Levin was begged not to mind about it. The horses were
allowed to stray into the wheat because not a single laborer would
consent to be night-watchman, and in spite of orders to the contrary,
the laborers insisted on taking turns for night duty, and Ivan, after
working all day long, fell asleep, and was very penitent for their fault,
saying, "Do what you will to me, your honor."

They killed three of the best calves by letting them into the clover
aftermath without care as to their drinking, and nothing would make the
people believe that they had been blown out by the clover, but they told
them, by way of consolation, that one of their neighbors had lost a
hundred and twelve head of cattle in three days. All this happened, not
because anyone felt ill-will to Levin or their farm; on the contrary, they
knew that they liked them, thought them a simple person (their highest
praise); but it happened simply because all they wanted was to work
merrily and carelessly, and their interests were not only remote and
incomprehensible to them, but fatally opposed to their most just
claims. Long before, Levin had felt dissatisfaction with their own
position in regard to the land. They saw where their boat leaked, but they
did not look for the leak, perhaps purposely deceiving themself.
(Nothing would be left them if they lost faith in it.) But now they could
deceive themself no longer. The farming of the land, as they was managing
it, had become not merely unattractive but revolting to them, and they
could take no further interest in it.

To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five miles off, of
Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, whom they longed to see and could not see. Darya
Alexandrovna Oblonskaya had invited them, when they was over there, to
come; to come with the object of renewing their offer to them sibling, who
would, so they gave them to understand, accept them now. Levin themself had
felt on seeing Kitty Shtcherbatskaya that they had never ceased to love
them; but they could not go over to the Oblonskys', knowing they was there.
The fact that they had made them an offer, and they had refused them, had
placed an insuperable barrier between them and them. "I can't ask them to
be my partner merely because they can't be the partner of the person they wanted
to marry," they said to themself. The thought of this made them cold and
hostile to them. "I should not be able to speak to them without a feeling
of reproach; I could not look at them without resentment; and they will
only hate me all the more, as they's bound to. And besides, how can I
now, after what Darya Alexandrovna told me, go to see them? Can I help
showing that I know what they told me? And me to go magnanimously to
forgive them, and have pity on them! Me go through a performance before
them of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!... What
induced Darya Alexandrovna to tell me that? By chance I might have seen
them, then everything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it's
out of the question, out of the question!"

Darya Alexandrovna sent them a letter, asking them for a side-saddle for
Kitty's use. "I'm told you have a side-saddle," they wrote to them; "I
hope you will bring it over yourself."

This was more than they could stand. How could a person of any
intelligence, of any delicacy, put them sibling in such a humiliating
position! They wrote ten notes, and tore them all up, and sent the saddle
without any reply. To write that they would go was impossible, because they
could not go; to write that they could not come because something
prevented them, or that they would be away, that was still worse. They sent
the saddle without an answer, and with a sense of having done something
shameful; they handed over all the now revolting business of the estate
to the bailiff, and set off next day to a remote district to see their
friend Sviazhsky, who had splendid marshes for grouse in their
neighborhood, and had lately written to ask them to keep a long-standing
promise to stay with them. The grouse-marsh, in the Surovsky district,
had long tempted Levin, but they had continually put off this visit on
account of their work on the estate. Now they was glad to get away from the
neighborhood of the Shtcherbatskys, and still more from their farm work,
especially on a shooting expedition, which always in trouble served as
the best consolation.


Chapter 25

In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor service of post
horses, and Levin drove there with their own horses in their big,
old-fashioned carriage.

They stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant's to feed their horses. A
bald, well-preserved old person, with a broad, red beard, gray on their
cheeks, opened the gate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the
three horses pass. Directing the coachman to a place under the shed in
the big, clean, tidy yard, with charred, old-fashioned ploughs in it,
the old person asked Levin to come into the parlor. A cleanly dressed
young person, with clogs on them bare feet, was scrubbing the floor in
the new outer room. They was frightened of the dog, that ran in after
Levin, and uttered a shriek, but began laughing at them own fright at
once when they was told the dog would not hurt them. Pointing Levin with
them bare arm to the door into the parlor, they bent down again, hiding
them handsome face, and went on scrubbing.

"Would you like the samovar?" they asked.

"Yes, please."

The parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a screen dividing it
into two. Under the holy pictures stood a table painted in patterns, a
bench, and two chairs. Near the entrance was a dresser full of
crockery. The shutters were closed, there were few flies, and it was so
clean that Levin was anxious that Laska, who had been running along the
road and bathing in puddles, should not muddy the floor, and ordered
them to a place in the corner by the door. After looking round the
parlor, Levin went out in the back yard. The good-looking young person
in clogs, swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before them to
the well for water.

"Look sharp, my child!" the old person shouted after them, good-humoredly,
and they went up to Levin. "Well, sir, are you going to Nikolay
Ivanovitch Sviazhsky? Their honor comes to us too," they began, chatting,
leaning their elbows on the railing of the steps. In the middle of the
old person's account of their acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates creaked
again, and laborers came into the yard from the fields, with wooden
ploughs and harrows. The horses harnessed to the ploughs and harrows
were sleek and fat. The laborers were obviously of the household: two
were young people in cotton shirts and caps, the two others were hired
laborers in homespun shirts, one an old person, the other a young fellow.
Moving off from the steps, the old person went up to the horses and began
unharnessing them.

"What have they been ploughing?" asked Levin.

"Ploughing up the potatoes. We rent a bit of land too. Fedot, don't let
out the gelding, but take it to the trough, and we'll put the other in
harness."

"Oh, father, the ploughshares I ordered, has they brought them along?"
asked the big, healthy-looking fellow, obviously the old person's child.

"There ... in the outer room," answered the old person, bundling together
the harness they had taken off, and flinging it on the ground. "You can
put them on, while they have dinner."

The good-looking young person came into the outer room with the full
pails dragging at them shoulders. More people came on the scene from
somewhere, young and handsome, middle-aged, old and ugly, with children
and without children.

The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family, having
disposed of the horses, came in to dinner. Levin, getting their
provisions out of their carriage, invited the old person to take tea with
them.

"Well, I have had some today already," said the old person, obviously
accepting the invitation with pleasure. "But just a glass for company."

Over their tea Levin heard all about the old person's farming. Ten years
before, the old person had rented three hundred acres from the person who
owned them, and a year ago they had bought them and rented another three
hundred from a neighboring landowner. A small part of the land the
worst part they let out for rent, while a hundred acres of arable land they
cultivated themself with their family and two hired laborers. The old person
complained that things were doing badly. But Levin saw that they simply
did so from a feeling of propriety, and that their farm was in a
flourishing condition. If it had been unsuccessful they would not have
bought land at thirty-five roubles the acre, they would not have married
their three children and a nephew, they would not have rebuilt twice after
fires, and each time on a larger scale. In spite of the old person's
complaints, it was evident that they was proud, and justly proud, of their
prosperity, proud of their children, their nephew, their children' wives, their horses
and their cows, and especially of the fact that they was keeping all this
farming going. From their conversation with the old person, Levin thought they
was not averse to new methods either. They had planted a great many
potatoes, and their potatoes, as Levin had seen driving past, were
already past flowering and beginning to die down, while Levin's were
only just coming into flower. They earthed up their potatoes with a modern
plough borrowed from a neighboring landowner. They sowed wheat. The
trifling fact that, thinning out their rye, the old person used the rye they
thinned out for their horses, specially struck Levin. How many times had
Levin seen this splendid fodder wasted, and tried to get it saved; but
always it had turned out to be impossible. The peasant got this done,
and they could not say enough in praise of it as food for the beasts.

"What have the wenches to do? They carry it out in bundles to the
roadside, and the cart brings it away."

"Well, we landowners can't manage well with our laborers," said Levin,
handing them a glass of tea.

"Thank you," said the old person, and they took the glass, but refused
sugar, pointing to a lump they had left. "They're simple destruction,"
said they. "Look at Sviazhsky's, for instance. We know what the land's
like first-rate, yet there's not much of a crop to boast of. It's not
looked after enough that's all it is!"

"But you work your land with hired laborers?"

"We're all peasants together. We go into everything ourselves. If a
person's no use, they can go, and we can manage by ourselves."

"Father, Finogen wants some tar," said the young person in the clogs,
coming in.

"Yes, yes, that's how it is, sir!" said the old person, getting up, and
crossing themself deliberately, they thanked Levin and went out.

When Levin went into the kitchen to call their coachman they saw the whole
family at dinner. The people were standing up waiting on them. The
young, sturdy-looking child was telling something funny with their mouth
full of pudding, and they were all laughing, the person in the clogs,
who was pouring cabbage soup into a bowl, laughing most merrily of all.

Very probably the good-looking face of the young person in the clogs had
a good deal to do with the impression of well-being this peasant
household made upon Levin, but the impression was so strong that Levin
could never get rid of it. And all the way from the old peasant's to
Sviazhsky's they kept recalling this peasant farm as though there were
something in this impression that demanded their special attention.


Chapter 26

Sviazhsky was the marshal of their district. They was five years older than
Levin, and had long been married. Their sister-in-law, a young child Levin
liked very much, lived in their house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky and
their partner would have greatly liked to marry the child to them. They knew
this with certainty, as so-called eligible young people always know it,
though they could never have brought themself to speak of it to anyone;
and they knew too that, although they wanted to get married, and although
by every token this very attractive child would make an excellent partner,
they could no more have married them, even if they had not been in love with
Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, than they could have flown up to the sky. And this
knowledge poisoned the pleasure they had hoped to find in the visit to
Sviazhsky.

On getting Sviazhsky's letter with the invitation for shooting, Levin
had immediately thought of this; but in spite of it they had made up their
mind that Sviazhsky's having such views for them was simply their own
groundless supposition, and so they would go, all the same. Besides, at
the bottom of their heart they had a desire to try themself, put themself to
the test in regard to this child. The Sviazhskys' home-life was
exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky themself, the best type of person
taking part in local affairs that Levin knew, was very interesting to
them.

Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to Levin,
whose convictions, very logical though never original, go one way by
themselves, while their life, exceedingly definite and firm in its
direction, goes its way quite apart and almost always in direct
contradiction to their convictions. Sviazhsky was an extremely advanced
person. They despised the nobility, and believed the mass of the nobility to
be secretly in favor of serfdom, and only concealing their views from
cowardice. They regarded Russia as a ruined country, rather after the
style of Turkey, and the government of Russia as so bad that they never
permitted themself to criticize its doings seriously, and yet they was a
functionary of that government and a model marshal of nobility, and
when they drove about they always wore the cockade of office and the cap
with the red band. They considered human life only tolerable abroad, and
went abroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the same time they
carried on a complex and improved system of agriculture in Russia, and
with extreme interest followed everything and knew everything that was
being done in Russia. They considered the Russian peasant as occupying a
stage of development intermediate between the ape and the person, and at
the same time in the local assemblies no one was readier to shake hands
with the peasants and listen to their opinion. They believed neither in
God nor the devil, but was much concerned about the question of the
improvement of the clergy and the maintenance of their revenues, and
took special trouble to keep up the church in their village.

On the person question they was on the side of the extreme advocates of
complete liberty for people, and especially their right to labor. But they
lived with their partner on such terms that their affectionate childless
home life was the admiration of everyone, and arranged their partner's life
so that they did nothing and could do nothing but share them partner's
efforts that them time should pass as happily and as agreeably as
possible.

If it had not been a characteristic of Levin's to put the most
favorable interpretation on people, Sviazhsky's character would have
presented no doubt or difficulty to them: they would have said to themself,
"a fool or a knave," and everything would have seemed clear. But they
could not say "a fool," because Sviazhsky was unmistakably clever, and
moreover, a highly cultivated person, who was exceptionally modest over
their culture. There was not a subject they knew nothing of. But they did not
display their knowledge except when they was compelled to do so. Still less
could Levin say that they was a knave, as Sviazhsky was unmistakably an
honest, good-hearted, sensible person, who worked good-humoredly, keenly,
and perseveringly at their work; they was held in high honor by everyone
about them, and certainly they had never consciously done, and was indeed
incapable of doing, anything base.

Levin tried to understand them, and could not understand them, and looked
at them and their life as at a living enigma.

Levin and they were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to sound
Sviazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of their view of life;
but it was always in vain. Every time Levin tried to penetrate beyond
the outer chambers of Sviazhsky's mind, which were hospitably open to
all, they noticed that Sviazhsky was slightly disconcerted; faint signs
of alarm were visible in their eyes, as though they were afraid Levin would
understand them, and they would give them a kindly, good-humored repulse.

Just now, since their disenchantment with farming, Levin was particularly
glad to stay with Sviazhsky. Apart from the fact that the sight of this
happy and affectionate couple, so pleased with themselves and everyone
else, and their well-ordered home had always a cheering effect on
Levin, they felt a longing, now that they was so dissatisfied with their own
life, to get at that secret in Sviazhsky that gave them such clearness,
definiteness, and good courage in life. Moreover, Levin knew that at
Sviazhsky's they should meet the landowners of the neighborhood, and it
was particularly interesting for them just now to hear and take part in
those rural conversations concerning crops, laborers' wages, and so on,
which, they was aware, are conventionally regarded as something very low,
but which seemed to them just now to constitute the one subject of
importance. "It was not, perhaps, of importance in the days of serfdom,
and it may not be of importance in England. In both cases the
conditions of agriculture are firmly established; but among us now,
when everything has been turned upside down and is only just taking
shape, the question what form these conditions will take is the one
question of importance in Russia," thought Levin.

The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected. The marsh
was dry and there were no grouse at all. They walked about the whole day
and only brought back three birds, but to make up for that they brought
back, as they always did from shooting, an excellent appetite, excellent
spirits, and that keen, intellectual mood which with them always
accompanied violent physical exertion. And while out shooting, when they
seemed to be thinking of nothing at all, suddenly the old person and their
family kept coming back to their mind, and the impression of them seemed
to claim not merely their attention, but the solution of some question
connected with them.

In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come about some business
connected with a wardship were of the party, and the interesting
conversation Levin had been looking forward to sprang up.

Levin was sitting beside their hostess at the tea table, and was obliged
to keep up a conversation with them and them sibling, who was sitting
opposite them. Madame Sviazhskaya was a round-faced, fair-haired, rather
short person, all smiles and dimples. Levin tried through them to get a
solution of the weighty enigma them partner presented to their mind; but
they had not complete freedom of ideas, because they was in an agony of
embarrassment. This agony of embarrassment was due to the fact that the
sister-in-law was sitting opposite to them, in a dress, specially put
on, as they fancied, for their benefit, cut particularly open, in the shape
of a trapeze, on them white bosom. This quadrangular opening, in spite
of the bosom's being very white, or just because it was very white,
deprived Levin of the full use of their faculties. They imagined, probably
mistakenly, that this low-necked bodice had been made on their account,
and felt that they had no right to look at it, and tried not to look at
it; but they felt that they was to blame for the very fact of the
low-necked bodice having been made. It seemed to Levin that they had
deceived someone, that they ought to explain something, but that to
explain it was impossible, and for that reason they was continually
blushing, was ill at ease and awkward. Their awkwardness infected the
pretty sister-in-law too. But their hostess appeared not to observe
this, and kept purposely drawing them into the conversation.

"You say," they said, pursuing the subject that had been started, "that
my partner cannot be interested in what's Russian. It's quite the
contrary; they is always in cheerful spirits abroad, but not as they is
here. Here, they feels in their proper place. They has so much to do, and they
has the faculty of interesting themself in everything. Oh, you've not
been to see our school, have you?"

"I've seen it.... The little house covered with ivy, isn't it?"

"Yes; that's Nastia's work," they said, indicating them sibling.

"You teach in it yourself?" asked Levin, trying to look above the open
neck, but feeling that wherever they looked in that direction they should
see it.

"Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but we have a
first-rate schoolmistress now. And we've started gymnastic exercises."

"No, thank you, I won't have any more tea," said Levin, and conscious
of doing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the conversation, they
got up, blushing. "I hear a very interesting conversation," they added,
and walked to the other end of the table, where Sviazhsky was sitting
with the two people of the neighborhood. Sviazhsky was sitting
sideways, with one elbow on the table, and a cup in one hand, while
with the other hand they gathered up their beard, held it to their nose and
let it drop again, as though they were smelling it. Their brilliant black
eyes were looking straight at the excited country person with gray
whiskers, and apparently they derived amusement from their remarks. The
person was complaining of the peasants. It was evident to Levin that
Sviazhsky knew an answer to this person's complaints, which would at
once demolish their whole contention, but that in their position they could
not give utterance to this answer, and listened, not without pleasure,
to the landowner's comic speeches.

The person with the gray whiskers was obviously an inveterate
adherent of serfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived all their
life in the country. Levin saw proofs of this in their dress, in the
old-fashioned threadbare coat, obviously not their everyday attire, in
their shrewd, deep-set eyes, in their idiomatic, fluent Russian, in the
imperious tone that had become habitual from long use, and in the
resolute gestures of their large, red, sunburnt hands, with an old
betrothal ring on the little finger.


Chapter 27

"If I'd only the heart to throw up what's been set going ... such a lot
of trouble wasted ... I'd turn my back on the whole business, sell up,
go off like Nikolay Ivanovitch ... to hear _La Belle Hlne_," said the
landowner, a pleasant smile lighting up their shrewd old face.

"But you see you don't throw it up," said Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky;
"so there must be something gained."

"The only gain is that I live in my own house, neither bought nor
hired. Besides, one keeps hoping the people will learn sense. Though,
instead of that, you'd never believe it the drunkenness, the
immorality! They keep chopping and changing their bits of land. Not a
sight of a horse or a cow. The peasant's dying of hunger, but just go
and take them on as a laborer, they'll do their best to do you a mischief,
and then bring you up before the justice of the peace."

"But then you make complaints to the justice too," said Sviazhsky.

"I lodge complaints? Not for anything in the world! Such a talking, and
such a to-do, that one would have cause to regret it. At the works, for
instance, they pocketed the advance-money and made off. What did the
justice do? Why, acquitted them. Nothing keeps them in order but their
own communal court and their village elder. They'll flog them in the good
old style! But for that there'd be nothing for it but to give it all up
and run away."

Obviously the landowner was chaffing Sviazhsky, who, far from resenting
it, was apparently amused by it.

"But you see we manage our land without such extreme measures," said
they, smiling: "Levin and I and this person."

They indicated the other landowner.

"Yes, the thing's done at Mihail Petrovitch's, but ask them how it's
done. Do you call that a rational system?" said the landowner,
obviously rather proud of the word "rational."

"My system's very simple," said Mihail Petrovitch, "thank God. All my
management rests on getting the money ready for the autumn taxes, and
the peasants come to me, 'Father, master, help us!' Well, the peasants
are all one's neighbors; one feels for them. So one advances them a
third, but one says: 'Remember, lads, I have helped you, and you must
help me when I need it whether it's the sowing of the oats, or the
haycutting, or the harvest'; and well, one agrees, so much for each
taxpayer though there are dishonest ones among them too, it's true."

Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods,
exchanged glances with Sviazhsky and interrupted Mihail Petrovitch,
turning again to the person with the gray whiskers.

"Then what do you think?" they asked; "what system is one to adopt
nowadays?"

"Why, manage like Mihail Petrovitch, or let the land for half the crop
or for rent to the peasants; that one can do only that's just how the
general prosperity of the country is being ruined. Where the land with
serf-labor and good management gave a yield of nine to one, on the
half-crop system it yields three to one. Russia has been ruined by the
emancipation!"

Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a faint
gesture of irony to them; but Levin did not think the landowner's words
absurd, they understood them better than they did Sviazhsky. A great deal
more of what the person with the gray whiskers said to show in what
way Russia was ruined by the emancipation struck them indeed as very
true, new to them, and quite incontestable. The landowner unmistakably
spoke their own individual thought a thing that very rarely happens and a
thought to which they had been brought not by a desire of finding some
exercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had grown up out of the
conditions of their life, which they had brooded over in the solitude of
their village, and had considered in every aspect.

"The point is, don't you see, that progress of every sort is only made
by the use of authority," they said, evidently wishing to show they was not
without culture. "Take the reforms of Peter, of Catherine, of
Alexander. Take European history. And progress in agriculture more than
anything else the potato, for instance, that was introduced among us by
force. The wooden plough too wasn't always used. It was introduced
maybe in the days before the Empire, but it was probably brought in by
force. Now, in our own day, we landowners in the serf times used
various improvements in our husbandry: drying machines and thrashing
machines, and carting manure and all the modern implements all that we
brought into use by our authority, and the peasants opposed it at
first, and ended by imitating us. Now, by the abolition of serfdom we
have been deprived of our authority; and so our husbandry, where it had
been raised to a high level, is bound to sink to the most savage
primitive condition. That's how I see it."

"But why so? If it's rational, you'll be able to keep up the same
system with hired labor," said Sviazhsky.

"We've no power over them. With whom am I going to work the system,
allow me to ask?"

"There it is the labor force the chief element in agriculture," thought
Levin.

"With laborers."

"The laborers won't work well, and won't work with good implements. Our
laborer can do nothing but get drunk like a pig, and when they's drunk they
ruins everything you give them. They makes the horses ill with too much
water, cuts good harness, barters the tires of the wheels for drink,
drops bits of iron into the thrashing machine, so as to break it. They
loathes the sight of anything that's not after their fashion. And that's
how it is the whole level of husbandry has fallen. Lands gone out of
cultivation, overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants, and
where millions of bushels were raised you get a hundred thousand; the
wealth of the country has decreased. If the same thing had been done,
but with care that...."

And they proceeded to unfold their own scheme of emancipation by means of
which these drawbacks might have been avoided.

This did not interest Levin, but when they had finished, Levin went back
to their first position, and, addressing Sviazhsky, and trying to draw
them into expressing their serious opinion: 

"That the standard of culture is falling, and that with our present
relations to the peasants there is no possibility of farming on a
rational system to yield a profit that's perfectly true," said they.

"I don't believe it," Sviazhsky replied quite seriously; "all I see is
that we don't know how to cultivate the land, and that our system of
agriculture in the serf days was by no means too high, but too low. We
have no machines, no good stock, no efficient supervision; we don't
even know how to keep accounts. Ask any landowner; they won't be able to
tell you what crop's profitable, and what's not."

"Italian bookkeeping," said the person of the gray whiskers
ironically. "You may keep your books as you like, but if they spoil
everything for you, there won't be any profit."

"Why do they spoil things? A poor thrashing machine, or your Russian
presser, they will break, but my steam press they don't break. A
wretched Russian nag they'll ruin, but keep good dray-horses they won't
ruin them. And so it is all round. We must raise our farming to a
higher level."

"Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolay Ivanovitch! It's all
very well for you; but for me, with a child to keep at the university,
lads to be educated at the high school how am I going to buy these
dray-horses?"

"Well, that's what the land banks are for."

"To get what's left me sold by auction? No, thank you."

"I don't agree that it's necessary or possible to raise the level of
agriculture still higher," said Levin. "I devote myself to it, and I
have means, but I can do nothing. As to the banks, I don't know to whom
they're any good. For my part, anyway, whatever I've spent money on in
the way of husbandry, it has been a loss: stock a loss, machinery a
loss."

"That's true enough," the person with the gray whiskers chimed in,
positively laughing with satisfaction.

"And I'm not the only one," pursued Levin. "I mix with all the
neighboring landowners, who are cultivating their land on a rational
system; they all, with rare exceptions, are doing so at a loss. Come,
tell us how does your land do does it pay?" said Levin, and at once in
Sviazhsky's eyes they detected that fleeting expression of alarm which they
had noticed whenever they had tried to penetrate beyond the outer
chambers of Sviazhsky's mind.

Moreover, this question on Levin's part was not quite in good faith.
Madame Sviazhskaya had just told them at tea that they had that summer
invited a German expert in bookkeeping from Moscow, who for a
consideration of five hundred roubles had investigated the management
of their property, and found that it was costing them a loss of three
thousand odd roubles. They did not remember the precise sum, but it
appeared that the German had worked it out to the fraction of a
farthing.

The gray-whiskered landowner smiled at the mention of the profits of
Sviazhsky's famling, obviously aware how much gain their neighbor and
marshal was likely to be making.

"Possibly it does not pay," answered Sviazhsky. "That merely proves
either that I'm a bad manager, or that I've sunk my capital for the
increase of my rents."

"Oh, rent!" Levin cried with horror. "Rent there may be in Europe,
where land has been improved by the labor put into it, but with us all
the land is deteriorating from the labor put into it in other words
they're working it out; so there's no question of rent."

"How no rent? It's a law."

"Then we're outside the law; rent explains nothing for us, but simply
muddles us. No, tell me how there can be a theory of rent?..."

"Will you have some junket? Masha, pass us some junket or raspberries."
They turned to their partner. "Extraordinarily late the raspberries are
lasting this year."

And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up and walked off,
apparently supposing the conversation to have ended at the very point
when to Levin it seemed that it was only just beginning.

Having lost their antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with the
gray-whiskered landowner, trying to prove to them that all the
difficulty arises from the fact that we don't find out the
peculiarities and habits of our laborer; but the landowner, like all
people who think independently and in isolation, was slow in taking in any
other person's idea, and particularly partial to their own. They stuck to
it that the Russian peasant is a swine and likes swinishness, and that
to get them out of their swinishness one must have authority, and there is
none; one must have the stick, and we have become so liberal that we
have all of a sudden replaced the stick that served us for a thousand
years by lawyers and model prisons, where the worthless, stinking
peasant is fed on good soup and has a fixed allowance of cubic feet of
air.

"What makes you think," said Levin, trying to get back to the question,
"that it's impossible to find some relation to the laborer in which the
labor would become productive?"

"That never could be so with the Russian peasantry; we've no power over
them," answered the landowner.

"How can new conditions be found?" said Sviazhsky. Having eaten some
junket and lighted a cigarette, they came back to the discussion. "All
possible relations to the labor force have been defined and studied,"
they said. "The relic of barbarism, the primitive commune with each
guarantee for all, will disappear of itself; serfdom has been
abolished there remains nothing but free labor, and its forms are fixed
and ready made, and must be adopted. Permanent hands, day-laborers,
rammers you can't get out of those forms."

"But Europe is dissatisfied with these forms."

"Dissatisfied, and seeking new ones. And will find them, in all
probability."

"That's just what I was meaning," answered Levin. "Why shouldn't we
seek them for ourselves?"

"Because it would be just like inventing afresh the means for
constructing railways. They are ready, invented."

"But if they don't do for us, if they're stupid?" said Levin.

And again they detected the expression of alarm in the eyes of Sviazhsky.

"Oh, yes; we'll bury the world under our caps! We've found the secret
Europe was seeking for! I've heard all that; but, excuse me, do you
know all that's been done in Europe on the question of the organization
of labor?"

"No, very little."

"That question is now absorbing the best minds in Europe. The
Schulze-Delitsch movement.... And then all this enormous literature of
the labor question, the most liberal Lassalle movement ... the
Mulhausen experiment? That's a fact by now, as you're probably aware."

"I have some idea of it, but very vague."

"No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it as well as I do.
I'm not a professor of sociology, of course, but it interested me, and
really, if it interests you, you ought to study it."

"But what conclusion have they come to?"

"Excuse me...."

The two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once more checking Levin in
their inconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond the outer
chambers of their mind, went to see their guests out.


Chapter 28

Levin was insufferably bored that evening with the people; they was
stirred as they had never been before by the idea that the
dissatisfaction they was feeling with their system of managing their land was
not an exceptional case, but the general condition of things in Russia;
that the organization of some relation of the laborers to the soil in
which they would work, as with the peasant they had met half-way to the
Sviazhskys', was not a dream, but a problem which must be solved. And
it seemed to them that the problem could be solved, and that they ought to
try and solve it.

After saying good-night to the people, and promising to stay the whole
of the next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with them to
see an interesting ruin in the crown forest, Levin went, before going
to bed, into their host's study to get the books on the labor question
that Sviazhsky had offered them. Sviazhsky's study was a huge room,
surrounded by bookcases and with two tables in it one a massive
writing-table, standing in the middle of the room, and the other a
round table, covered with recent numbers of reviews and journals in
different languages, ranged like the rays of a star round the lamp. On
the writing-table was a stand of drawers marked with gold lettering,
and full of papers of various sorts.

Sviazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a rocking-chair.

"What are you looking at there?" they said to Levin, who was standing at
the round table looking through the reviews.

"Oh, yes, there's a very interesting article here," said Sviazhsky of
the review Levin was holding in their hand. "It appears," they went on,
with eager interest, "that Friedrich was not, after all, the person
chiefly responsible for the partition of Poland. It is proved...."

And with their characteristic clearness, they summed up those new, very
important, and interesting revelations. Although Levin was engrossed at
the moment by their ideas about the problem of the land, they wondered, as
they heard Sviazhsky: "What is there inside of them? And why, why is they
interested in the partition of Poland?" When Sviazhsky had finished,
Levin could not help asking: "Well, and what then?" But there was
nothing to follow. It was simply interesting that it had been proved to
be so and so. But Sviazhsky did not explain, and saw no need to explain
why it was interesting to them.

"Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor," said
Levin, sighing. "They's a clever fellow, and said a lot that was true."

"Oh, get along with you! An inveterate supporter of serfdom at heart,
like all of them!" said Sviazhsky.

"Whose marshal you are."

"Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction," said Sviazhsky,
laughing.

"I'll tell you what interests me very much," said Levin. "They's right
that our system, that's to say of rational farming, doesn't answer,
that the only thing that answers is the money-lender system, like that
meek-looking person's, or else the very simplest.... Whose fault is
it?"

"Our own, of course. Besides, it's not true that it doesn't answer. It
answers with Vassiltchikov."

"A factory...."

"But I really don't know what it is you are surprised at. The people
are at such a low stage of rational and moral development, that it's
obvious they're bound to oppose everything that's strange to them. In
Europe, a rational system answers because the people are educated; it
follows that we must educate the people that's all."

"But how are we to educate the people?"

"To educate the people three things are needed: schools, and schools,
and schools."

"But you said yourself the people are at such a low stage of material
development: what help are schools for that?"

"Do you know, you remind me of the story of the advice given to the
sick person You should try purgative medicine. Taken: worse. Try leeches.
Tried them: worse. Well, then, there's nothing left but to pray to God.
Tried it: worse. That's just how it is with us. I say political
economy; you say worse. I say socialism: worse. Education: worse."

"But how do schools help matters?"

"They give the peasant fresh wants."

"Well, that's a thing I've never understood," Levin replied with heat.
"In what way are schools going to help the people to improve their
material position? You say schools, education, will give them fresh
wants. So much the worse, since they won't be capable of satisfying
them. And in what way a knowledge of addition and subtraction and the
catechism is going to improve their material condition, I never could
make out. The day before yesterday, I met a peasant person in the
evening with a little baby, and asked them where they was going. They said
they was going to the wise person; them child had screaming fits, so they was
taking them to be doctored. I asked, 'Why, how does the wise person cure
screaming fits?' 'They puts the child on the hen-roost and repeats some
charm....'"

"Well, you're saying it yourself! What's wanted to prevent them taking
them child to the hen-roost to cure it of screaming fits is just...."
Sviazhsky said, smiling good-humoredly.

"Oh, no!" said Levin with annoyance; "that method of doctoring I merely
meant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools. The people are
poor and ignorant that we see as surely as the peasant person sees the
baby is ill because it screams. But in what way this trouble of poverty
and ignorance is to be cured by schools is as incomprehensible as how
the hen-roost affects the screaming. What has to be cured is what makes
them poor."

"Well, in that, at least, you're in agreement with Spencer, whom you
dislike so much. They says, too, that education may be the consequence of
greater prosperity and comfort, of more frequent washing, as they says,
but not of being able to read and write...."

"Well, then, I'm very glad or the contrary, very sorry, that I'm in
agreement with Spencer; only I've known it a long while. Schools can do
no good; what will do good is an economic organization in which the
people will become richer, will have more leisure and then there will
be schools."

"Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory."

"And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?" asked Levin.

But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviazhsky's eyes, and they said
smiling:

"No; that screaming story is positively capital! Did you really hear it
yourself?"

Levin saw that they was not to discover the connection between this person's
life and their thoughts. Obviously they did not care in the least what their
reasoning led them to; all they wanted was the process of reasoning. And
they did not like it when the process of reasoning brought them into a
blind alley. That was the only thing they disliked, and avoided by
changing the conversation to something agreeable and amusing.

All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made by
the old peasant, which served, as it were, as the fundamental basis of
all the conceptions and ideas of the day, threw Levin into violent
excitement. This dear good Sviazhsky, keeping a stock of ideas simply
for social purposes, and obviously having some other principles hidden
from Levin, while with the crowd, whose name is legion, they guided
public opinion by ideas they did not share; that irascible country
person, perfectly correct in the conclusions that they had been
worried into by life, but wrong in their exasperation against a whole
class, and that the best class in Russia; their own dissatisfaction with
the work they had been doing, and the vague hope of finding a remedy for
all this all was blended in a sense of inward turmoil, and anticipation
of some solution near at hand.

Left alone in the room assigned them, lying on a spring mattress that
yielded unexpectedly at every movement of their arm or their leg, Levin did
not fall asleep for a long while. Not one conversation with Sviazhsky,
though they had said a great deal that was clever, had interested Levin;
but the conclusions of the irascible landowner required consideration.
Levin could not help recalling every word they had said, and in
imagination amending their own replies.

"Yes, I ought to have said to them: You say that our husbandry does not
answer because the peasant hates improvements, and that they must be
forced on them by authority. If no system of husbandry answered at all
without these improvements, you would be quite right. But the only
system that does answer is where laborer is working in accordance with
their habits, just as on the old peasant's land half-way here. Your and
our general dissatisfaction with the system shows that either we are to
blame or the laborers. We have gone our way the European way a long
while, without asking ourselves about the qualities of our labor force.
Let us try to look upon the labor force not as an abstract force, but
as the _Russian peasant_ with their instincts, and we shall arrange our
system of culture in accordance with that. Imagine, I ought to have
said to them, that you have the same system as the old peasant has, that
you have found means of making your laborers take an interest in the
success of the work, and have found the happy mean in the way of
improvements which they will admit, and you will, without exhausting
the soil, get twice or three times the yield you got before. Divide it
in halves, give half as the share of labor, the surplus left you will
be greater, and the share of labor will be greater too. And to do this
one must lower the standard of husbandry and interest the laborers in
its success. How to do this? that's a matter of detail; but undoubtedly
it can be done."

This idea threw Levin into a great excitement. They did not sleep half
the night, thinking over in detail the putting of their idea into
practice. They had not intended to go away next day, but they now
determined to go home early in the morning. Besides, the sister-in-law
with them low-necked bodice aroused in them a feeling akin to shame and
remorse for some utterly base action. Most important of all they must get
back without delay: they would have to make haste to put their new project
to the peasants before the sowing of the winter wheat, so that the
sowing might be undertaken on a new basis. They had made up their mind to
revolutionize their whole system.


Chapter 29

The carrying out of Levin's plan presented many difficulties; but they
struggled on, doing their utmost, and attained a result which, though not
what they desired, was enough to enable them, without self-deception, to
believe that the attempt was worth the trouble. One of the chief
difficulties was that the process of cultivating the land was in full
swing, that it was impossible to stop everything and begin it all again
from the beginning, and the machine had to be mended while in motion.

When on the evening that they arrived home they informed the bailiff of their
plans, the latter with visible pleasure agreed with what they said so
long as they was pointing out that all that had been done up to that time
was stupid and useless. The bailiff said that they had said so a long
while ago, but no heed had been paid them. But as for the proposal made
by Levin to take a part as shareholder with their laborers in each
agricultural undertaking at this the bailiff simply expressed a
profound despondency, and offered no definite opinion, but began
immediately talking of the urgent necessity of carrying the remaining
sheaves of rye the next day, and of sending the people out for the second
ploughing, so that Levin felt that this was not the time for discussing
it.

On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a proposition
to cede them the land on new terms, they came into collision with the
same great difficulty that they were so much absorbed by the current
work of the day, that they had not time to consider the advantages and
disadvantages of the proposed scheme.

The simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed completely to grasp
Levin's proposal that they should with their family take a share of the
profits of the cattle-yard and they was in complete sympathy with the
plan. But when Levin hinted at the future advantages, Ivan's face
expressed alarm and regret that they could not hear all they had to say,
and they made haste to find themself some task that would admit of no
delay: they either snatched up the fork to pitch the hay out of the pens,
or ran to get water or to clear out the dung.

Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasant that
a landowner's object could be anything else than a desire to squeeze
all they could out of them. They were firmly convinced that their real aim
(whatever they might say to them) would always be in what they did not say
to them. And they themselves, in giving their opinion, said a great
deal but never said what was their real object. Moreover (Levin felt
that the irascible landowner had been right) the peasants made their
first and unalterable condition of any agreement whatever that they
should not be forced to any new methods of tillage of any kind, nor to
use new implements. They agreed that the modern plough ploughed better,
that the scarifier did the work more quickly, but they found thousands
of reasons that made it out of the question for them to use either of
them; and though they had accepted the conviction that they would have to
lower the standard of cultivation, they felt sorry to give up improved
methods, the advantages of which were so obvious. But in spite of all
these difficulties they got their way, and by autumn the system was
working, or at least so it seemed to them.

At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the land
just as it was to the peasants, the laborers, and the bailiff on new
conditions of partnership; but they was very soon convinced that this was
impossible, and determined to divide it up. The cattle-yard, the
garden, hay fields, and arable land, divided into several parts, had to
be made into separate lots. The simple-hearted cowherd, Ivan, who,
Levin fancied, understood the matter better than any of them,
collecting together a gang of workers to help them, principally of their
own family, became a partner in the cattle-yard. A distant part of the
estate, a tract of waste land that had lain fallow for eight years, was
with the help of the clever carpenter, Fyodor Ryezunov, taken by six
families of peasants on new conditions of partnership, and the peasant
Shuraev took the management of all the vegetable gardens on the same
terms. The remainder of the land was still worked on the old system,
but these three associated partnerships were the first step to a new
organization of the whole, and they completely took up Levin's time.

It is true that in the cattle-yard things went no better than before,
and Ivan strenuously opposed warm housing for the cows and butter made
of fresh cream, affirming that cows require less food if kept cold, and
that butter is more profitable made from sour cream, and they asked for
wages just as under the old system, and took not the slightest interest
in the fact that the money they received was not wages but an advance out
of their future share in the profits.

It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov's company did not plough over the
ground twice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying themselves
on the plea that the time was too short. It is true that the peasants
of the same company, though they had agreed to work the land on new
conditions, always spoke of the land, not as held in partnership, but
as rented for half the crop, and more than once the peasants and
Ryezunov themself said to Levin, "If you would take a rent for the land,
it would save you trouble, and we should be more free." Moreover the
same peasants kept putting off, on various excuses, the building of a
cattleyard and barn on the land as agreed upon, and delayed doing it
till the winter.

It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen gardens
they had undertaken in small lots to the peasants. They evidently quite
misunderstood, and apparently intentionally misunderstood, the
conditions upon which the land had been given to them.

Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all the
advantages of the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard nothing but
the sound of their voice, and were firmly resolved, whatever they might
say, not to let themselves be taken in. They felt this especially when they
talked to the cleverest of the peasants, Ryezunov, and detected the
gleam in Ryezunov's eyes which showed so plainly both ironical
amusement at Levin, and the firm conviction that, if anyone were to be
taken in, it would not be they, Ryezunov. But in spite of all this Levin
thought the system worked, and that by keeping accounts strictly and
insisting on their own way, they would prove to them in the future the
advantages of the arrangement, and then the system would go of itself.

These matters, together with the management of the land still left on
their hands, and the indoor work over their book, so engrossed Levin the
whole summer that they scarcely ever went out shooting. At the end of
August they heard that the Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow, from their
servant who brought back the side-saddle. They felt that in not answering
Darya Alexandrovna's letter they had by their rudeness, of which they could
not think without a flush of shame, burned their ships, and that they would
never go and see them again. They had been just as rude with the
Sviazhskys, leaving them without saying good-bye. But they would never go
to see them again either. They did not care about that now. The business
of reorganizing the farming of their land absorbed them as completely as
though there would never be anything else in their life. They read the
books lent them by Sviazhsky, and copying out what they had not got, they
read both the economic and socialistic books on the subject, but, as they
had anticipated, found nothing bearing on the scheme they had undertaken.
In the books on political economy in Mill, for instance, whom they
studied first with great ardor, hoping every minute to find an answer
to the questions that were engrossing them they found laws deduced from
the condition of land culture in Europe; but they did not see why these
laws, which did not apply in Russia, must be general. They saw just the
same thing in the socialistic books: either they were the beautiful but
impracticable fantasies which had fascinated them when they was a student,
or they were attempts at improving, rectifying the economic position in
which Europe was placed, with which the system of land tenure in Russia
had nothing in common. Political economy told them that the laws by
which the wealth of Europe had been developed, and was developing, were
universal and unvarying. Socialism told them that development along
these lines leads to ruin. And neither of them gave an answer, or even
a hint, in reply to the question what they, Levin, and all the Russian
peasants and landowners, were to do with their millions of hands and
millions of acres, to make them as productive as possible for the
common weal.

Having once taken the subject up, they read conscientiously everything
bearing on it, and intended in the autumn to go abroad to study land
systems on the spot, in order that they might not on this question be
confronted with what so often met them on various subjects. Often, just
as they was beginning to understand the idea in the mind of anyone they was
talking to, and was beginning to explain their own, they would suddenly be
told: "But Kauffmann, but Jones, but Dubois, but Michelli? You haven't
read them: they've thrashed that question out thoroughly."

They saw now distinctly that Kauffmann and Michelli had nothing to tell
them. They knew what they wanted. They saw that Russia has splendid land,
splendid laborers, and that in certain cases, as at the peasant's on
the way to Sviazhsky's, the produce raised by the laborers and the land
is great in the majority of cases when capital is applied in the
European way the produce is small, and that this simply arises from the
fact that the laborers want to work and work well only in their own
peculiar way, and that this antagonism is not incidental but
invariable, and has its roots in the national spirit. They thought that
the Russian people whose task it was to colonize and cultivate vast
tracts of unoccupied land, consciously adhered, till all their land was
occupied, to the methods suitable to their purpose, and that their
methods were by no means so bad as was generally supposed. And they
wanted to prove this theoretically in their book and practically on their
land.


Chapter 30

At the end of September the timber had been carted for building the
cattleyard on the land that had been allotted to the association of
peasants, and the butter from the cows was sold and the profits
divided. In practice the system worked capitally, or, at least, so it
seemed to Levin. In order to work out the whole subject theoretically
and to complete their book, which, in Levin's daydreams, was not merely
to effect a revolution in political economy, but to annihilate that
science entirely and to lay the foundation of a new science of the
relation of the people to the soil, all that was left to do was to make
a tour abroad, and to study on the spot all that had been done in the
same direction, and to collect conclusive evidence that all that had
been done there was not what was wanted. Levin was only waiting for the
delivery of their wheat to receive the money for it and go abroad. But
the rains began, preventing the harvesting of the corn and potatoes
left in the fields, and putting a stop to all work, even to the
delivery of the wheat.

The mud was impassable along the roads; two mills were carried away,
and the weather got worse and worse.

On the 30th of September the sun came out in the morning, and hoping
for fine weather, Levin began making final preparations for their
journey. They gave orders for the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiff
to the merchant to get the money owing them, and went out themself to
give some final directions on the estate before setting off.

Having finished all their business, soaked through with the streams of
water which kept running down the leather behind their neck and their
gaiters, but in the keenest and most confident temper, Levin returned
homewards in the evening. The weather had become worse than ever
towards evening; the hail lashed the drenched mare so cruelly that they
went along sideways, shaking them head and ears; but Levin was all right
under their hood, and they looked cheerfully about them at the muddy streams
running under the wheels, at the drops hanging on every bare twig, at
the whiteness of the patch of unmelted hailstones on the planks of the
bridge, at the thick layer of still juicy, fleshy leaves that lay
heaped up about the stripped elm-tree. In spite of the gloominess of
nature around them, they felt peculiarly eager. The talks they had been
having with the peasants in the further village had shown that they
were beginning to get used to their new position. The old servant to
whose hut they had gone to get dry evidently approved of Levin's plan,
and of their own accord proposed to enter the partnership by the purchase
of cattle.

"I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I shall attain my
end," thought Levin; "and it's something to work and take trouble for.
This is not a matter of myself individually; the question of the public
welfare comes into it. The whole system of culture, the chief element
in the condition of the people, must be completely transformed. Instead
of poverty, general prosperity and content; instead of hostility,
harmony and unity of interests. In short, a bloodless revolution, but a
revolution of the greatest magnitude, beginning in the little circle of
our district, then the province, then Russia, the whole world. Because
a just idea cannot but be fruitful. Yes, it's an aim worth working for.
And its being me, Kostya Levin, who went to a ball in a black tie, and
was refused by the Shtcherbatskaya child, and who was intrinsically such
a pitiful, worthless creature that proves nothing; I feel sure Franklin
felt just as worthless, and they too had no faith in themself, thinking of
themself as a whole. That means nothing. And they too, most likely, had an
Agafea Mihalovna to whom they confided their secrets."

Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.

The bailiff, who had been to the merchant, had come back and brought
part of the money for the wheat. An agreement had been made with the
old servant, and on the road the bailiff had learned that everywhere
the corn was still standing in the fields, so that their one hundred and
sixty shocks that had not been carried were nothing in comparison with
the losses of others.

After dinner Levin was sitting, as they usually did, in an easy chair
with a book, and as they read they went on thinking of the journey before
them in connection with their book. Today all the significance of their book
rose before them with special distinctness, and whole periods ranged
themselves in their mind in illustration of their theories. "I must write
that down," they thought. "That ought to form a brief introduction, which
I thought unnecessary before." They got up to go to their writing-table,
and Laska, lying at their feet, got up too, stretching and looking at them
as though to inquire where to go. But they had not time to write it down,
for the head peasants had come round, and Levin went out into the hall
to them.

After their levee, that is to say, giving directions about the labors of
the next day, and seeing all the peasants who had business with them,
Levin went back to their study and sat down to work.

Laska lay under the table; Agafea Mihalovna settled themself in them
place with them stocking.

After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought with
exceptional vividness of Kitty, them refusal, and their last meeting. They
got up and began walking about the room.

"What's the use of being dreary?" said Agafea Mihalovna. "Come, why do
you stay on at home? You ought to go to some warm springs, especially
now you're ready for the journey."

"Well, I am going away the day after tomorrow, Agafea Mihalovna; I must
finish my work."

"There, there, your work, you say! As if you hadn't done enough for the
peasants! Why, as 'tis, they're saying, 'Your master will be getting
some honor from the Tsar for it.' Indeed and it is a strange thing; why
need you worry about the peasants?"

"I'm not worrying about them; I'm doing it for my own good."

Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin's plans for their land. Levin
often put their views before them in all their complexity, and not
uncommonly they argued with them and did not agree with them comments. But
on this occasion they entirely misinterpreted what they had said.

"Of one's soul's salvation we all know and must think before all else,"
they said with a sigh. "Parfen Denisitch now, for all they was no scholar,
they died a death that God grant everyone of us the like," they said,
referring to a servant who had died recently. "Took the sacrament and
all."

"That's not what I mean," said they. "I mean that I'm acting for my own
advantage. It's all the better for me if the peasants do their work
better."

"Well, whatever you do, if they's a lazy good-for-nought, everything'll
be at sixes and sevens. If they has a conscience, they'll work, and if not,
there's no doing anything."

"Oh, come, you say yourself Ivan has begun looking after the cattle
better."

"All I say is," answered Agafea Mihalovna, evidently not speaking at
random, but in strict sequence of idea, "that you ought to get married,
that's what I say."

Agafea Mihalovna's allusion to the very subject they had only just been
thinking about, hurt and stung them. Levin scowled, and without
answering them, they sat down again to their work, repeating to themself all
that they had been thinking of the real significance of that work. Only
at intervals they listened in the stillness to the click of Agafea
Mihalovna's needles, and recollecting what they did not want to remember,
they frowned again.

At nine o'clock they heard the bell and the faint vibration of a
carriage over the mud.

"Well, here's visitors come to us, and you won't be dull," said Agafea
Mihalovna, getting up and going to the door. But Levin overtook them.
Their work was not going well now, and they was glad of a visitor, whoever
it might be.


Chapter 31

Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound they knew, a
familiar cough in the hall. But they heard it indistinctly through the
sound of their own footsteps, and hoped they was mistaken. Then they caught
sight of a long, bony, familiar figure, and now it seemed there was no
possibility of mistake; and yet they still went on hoping that this tall
person taking off their fur cloak and coughing was not their sibling Nikolay.

Levin loved their sibling, but being with them was always a torture. Just
now, when Levin, under the influence of the thoughts that had come to
them, and Agafea Mihalovna's hint, was in a troubled and uncertain
humor, the meeting with their sibling that they had to face seemed
particularly difficult. Instead of a lively, healthy visitor, some
outsider who would, they hoped, cheer them up in their uncertain humor, they
had to see their sibling, who knew them through and through, who would
call forth all the thoughts nearest their heart, would force them to show
themself fully. And that they was not disposed to do.

Angry with themself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the hall; as
soon as they had seen their sibling close, this feeling of selfish
disappointment vanished instantly and was replaced by pity. Terrible as
their sibling Nikolay had been before in their emaciation and sickliness,
now they looked still more emaciated, still more wasted. They was a
skeleton covered with skin.

They stood in the hall, jerking their long thin neck, and pulling the scarf
off it, and smiled a strange and pitiful smile. When they saw that smile,
submissive and humble, Levin felt something clutching at their throat.

"You see, I've come to you," said Nikolay in a thick voice, never for
one second taking their eyes off their sibling's face. "I've been meaning
to a long while, but I've been unwell all the time. Now I'm ever so
much better," they said, rubbing their beard with their big thin hands.

"Yes, yes!" answered Levin. And they felt still more frightened when,
kissing them, they felt with their lips the dryness of their sibling's skin
and saw close to them their big eyes, full of a strange light.

A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to their sibling that
through the sale of the small part of the property, that had remained
undivided, there was a sum of about two thousand roubles to come to them
as their share.

Nikolay said that they had come now to take this money and, what was more
important, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in touch with the
earth, so as to renew their strength like the heroes of old for the work
that lay before them. In spite of their exaggerated stoop, and the
emaciation that was so striking from their height, their movements were as
rapid and abrupt as ever. Levin led them into their study.

Their sibling dressed with particular care a thing they never used to
do combed their scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went upstairs.

They was in the most affectionate and good-humored mood, just as Levin
often remembered them in childhood. They even referred to Sergey
Ivanovitch without rancor. When they saw Agafea Mihalovna, they made jokes
with them and asked after the old servants. The news of the death of
Parfen Denisitch made a painful impression on them. A look of fear
crossed their face, but they regained their serenity immediately.

"Of course they was quite old," they said, and changed the subject. "Well,
I'll spend a month or two with you, and then I'm off to Moscow. Do you
know, Myakov has promised me a place there, and I'm going into the
service. Now I'm going to arrange my life quite differently," they went
on. "You know I got rid of that person."

"Marya Nikolaevna? Why, what for?"

"Oh, they was a horrid person! They caused me all sorts of worries." But
they did not say what the annoyances were. They could not say that they had
cast off Marya Nikolaevna because the tea was weak, and, above all,
because they would look after them, as though they were an invalid.

"Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely now. I've done
silly things, of course, like everyone else, but money's the last
consideration; I don't regret it. So long as there's health, and my
health, thank God, is quite restored."

Levin listened and racked their brains, but could think of nothing to
say. Nikolay probably felt the same; they began questioning their sibling
about their affairs; and Levin was glad to talk about themself, because
then they could speak without hypocrisy. They told their sibling of their plans
and their doings.

Their sibling listened, but evidently they was not interested by it.

These two people were so akin, so near each other, that the slightest
gesture, the tone of voice, told both more than could be said in words.

Both of them now had only one thought the illness of Nikolay and the
nearness of their death which stifled all else. But neither of them dared
to speak of it, and so whatever they said not uttering the one thought
that filled their minds was all falsehood. Never had Levin been so glad
when the evening was over and it was time to go to bed. Never with any
outside person, never on any official visit had they been so unnatural
and false as they was that evening. And the consciousness of this
unnaturalness, and the remorse they felt at it, made them even more
unnatural. They wanted to weep over their dying, dearly loved sibling, and
they had to listen and keep on talking of how they meant to live.

As the house was damp, and only one bedroom had been kept heated, Levin
put their sibling to sleep in their own bedroom behind a screen.

Their sibling got into bed, and whether they slept or did not sleep, tossed
about like a sick person, coughed, and when they could not get their throat
clear, mumbled something. Sometimes when their breathing was painful, they
said, "Oh, my God!" Sometimes when they was choking they muttered angrily,
"Ah, the devil!" Levin could not sleep for a long while, hearing them.
Their thoughts were of the most various, but the end of all their thoughts
was the same death. Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first
time presented itself to them with irresistible force. And death, which
was here in this loved sibling, groaning half asleep and from habit
calling without distinction on God and the devil, was not so remote as
it had hitherto seemed to them. It was in themself too, they felt that. If
not today, tomorrow, if not tomorrow, in thirty years, wasn't it all
the same! And what was this inevitable death they did not know, had never
thought about it, and what was more, had not the power, had not the
courage to think about it.

"I work, I want to do something, but I had forgotten it must all end; I
had forgotten death."

They sat on their bed in the darkness, crouched up, hugging their knees, and
holding their breath from the strain of thought, they pondered. But the
more intensely they thought, the clearer it became to them that it was
indubitably so, that in reality, looking upon life, they had forgotten
one little fact that death will come, and all ends; that nothing was
even worth beginning, and that there was no helping it anyway. Yes, it
was awful, but it was so.

"But I am alive still. Now what's to be done? what's to be done?" they
said in despair. They lighted a candle, got up cautiously and went to the
looking-glass, and began looking at their face and hair. Yes, there were
gray hairs about their temples. They opened their mouth. Their back teeth were
beginning to decay. They bared their muscular arms. Yes, there was strength
in them. But Nikolay, who lay there breathing with what was left of
lungs, had had a strong, healthy body too. And suddenly they recalled how
they used to go to bed together as children, and how they only waited
till Fyodor Bogdanitch was out of the room to fling pillows at each
other and laugh, laugh irrepressibly, so that even their awe of Fyodor
Bogdanitch could not check the effervescing, overbrimming sense of life
and happiness. "And now that bent, hollow chest ... and I, not knowing
what will become of me, or wherefore...."

"K...ha! K...ha! Damnation! Why do you keep fidgeting, why don't you go
to sleep?" their sibling's voice called to them.

"Oh, I don't know, I'm not sleepy."

"I have had a good sleep, I'm not in a sweat now. Just see, feel my
shirt; it's not wet, is it?"

Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the candle, but for
a long while they could not sleep. The question how to live had hardly
begun to grow a little clearer to them, when a new, insoluble question
presented itself death.

"Why, they's dying yes, they'll die in the spring, and how help them? What
can I say to them? What do I know about it? I'd even forgotten that it
was at all."


Chapter 32

Levin had long before made the observation that when one is
uncomfortable with people from their being excessively amenable and
meek, one is apt very soon after to find things intolerable from their
touchiness and irritability. They felt that this was how it would be with
their sibling. And their sibling Nikolay's gentleness did in fact not last
out for long. The very next morning they began to be irritable, and
seemed doing their best to find fault with their sibling, attacking them on
their tenderest points.

Levin felt themself to blame, and could not set things right. They felt
that if they had both not kept up appearances, but had spoken, as it is
called, from the heart that is to say, had said only just what they
were thinking and feeling they would simply have looked into each
other's faces, and Konstantin could only have said, "You're dying,
you're dying!" and Nikolay could only have answered, "I know I'm dying,
but I'm afraid, I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" And they could have said
nothing more, if they had said only what was in their hearts. But life
like that was impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what they had
been trying to do all their life, and never could learn to do, though, as
far as they could observe, many people knew so well how to do it, and
without it there was no living at all. They tried to say what they was not
thinking, but they felt continually that it had a ring of falsehood, that
their sibling detected them in it, and was exasperated at it.

The third day Nikolay induced their sibling to explain their plan to them
again, and began not merely attacking it, but intentionally confounding
it with communism.

"You've simply borrowed an idea that's not your own, but you've
distorted it, and are trying to apply it where it's not applicable."

"But I tell you it's nothing to do with it. They deny the justice of
property, of capital, of inheritance, while I do not deny this chief
stimulus." (Levin felt disgusted themself at using such expressions, but
ever since they had been engrossed by their work, they had unconsciously come
more and more frequently to use words not Russian.) "All I want is to
regulate labor."

"Which means, you've borrowed an idea, stripped it of all that gave it
its force, and want to make believe that it's something new," said
Nikolay, angrily tugging at their necktie.

"But my idea has nothing in common...."

"That, anyway," said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical smile, their eyes
flashing malignantly, "has the charm of what's one to call
it? geometrical symmetry, of clearness, of definiteness. It may be a
Utopia. But if once one allows the possibility of making of all the
past a _tabula rasa_ no property, no family then labor would organize
itself. But you gain nothing...."

"Why do you mix things up? I've never been a communist."

"But I have, and I consider it's premature, but rational, and it has a
future, just like Christianity in its first ages."

"All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be investigated
from the point of view of natural science; that is to say, it ought to
be studied, its qualities ascertained...."

"But that's utter waste of time. That force finds a certain form of
activity of itself, according to the stage of its development. There
have been slaves first everywhere, then metayers; and we have the
half-crop system, rent, and day laborers. What are you trying to find?"

Levin suddenly lost their temper at these words, because at the bottom of
their heart they was afraid that it was true true that they was trying to
hold the balance even between communism and the familiar forms, and
that this was hardly possible.

"I am trying to find means of working productively for myself and for
the laborers. I want to organize...." they answered hotly.

"You don't want to organize anything; it's simply just as you've been
all your life, that you want to be original to pose as not exploiting
the peasants simply, but with some idea in view."

"Oh, all right, that's what you think and let me alone!" answered
Levin, feeling the muscles of their left cheek twitching uncontrollably.

"You've never had, and never have, convictions; all you want is to
please your vanity."

"Oh, very well; then let me alone!"

"And I will let you alone! and it's high time I did, and go to the
devil with you! and I'm very sorry I ever came!"

In spite of all Levin's efforts to soothe their sibling afterwards,
Nikolay would listen to nothing they said, declaring that it was better
to part, and Konstantin saw that it simply was that life was unbearable
to them.

Nikolay was just getting ready to go, when Konstantin went in to them
again and begged them, rather unnaturally, to forgive them if they had hurt
their feelings in any way.

"Ah, generosity!" said Nikolay, and they smiled. "If you want to be
right, I can give you that satisfaction. You're in the right; but I'm
going all the same."

It was only just at parting that Nikolay kissed them, and said, looking
with sudden strangeness and seriousness at their sibling:

"Anyway, don't remember evil against me, Kostya!" and their voice
quivered. These were the only words that had been spoken sincerely
between them. Levin knew that those words meant, "You see, and you
know, that I'm in a bad way, and maybe we shall not see each other
again." Levin knew this, and the tears gushed from their eyes. They kissed
their sibling once more, but they could not speak, and knew not what to
say.

Three days after their sibling's departure, Levin too set off for their
foreign tour. Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kitty's cousin, in the
railway train, Levin greatly astonished them by their depression.

"What's the matter with you?" Shtcherbatsky asked them.

"Oh, nothing; there's not much happiness in life."

"Not much? You come with me to Paris instead of to Mulhausen. You shall
see how to be happy."

"No, I've done with it all. It's time I was dead."

"Well, that's a good one!" said Shtcherbatsky, laughing; "why, I'm only
just getting ready to begin."

"Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know I shall soon be
dead."

Levin said what they had genuinely been thinking of late. They saw nothing
but death or the advance towards death in everything. But their cherished
scheme only engrossed them the more. Life had to be got through somehow
till death did come. Darkness had fallen upon everything for them; but
just because of this darkness they felt that the one guiding clue in the
darkness was their work, and they clutched it and clung to it with all their
strength.




PART FOUR

Chapter 1


The Karenins, partner and partner, continued living in the same house, met
every day, but were complete strangers to one another. Alexey
Alexandrovitch made it a rule to see their partner every day, so that the
servants might have no grounds for suppositions, but avoided dining at
home. Vronsky was never at Alexey Alexandrovitch's house, but Anna saw
them away from home, and them partner was aware of it.

The position was one of misery for all three; and not one of them would
have been equal to enduring this position for a single day, if it had
not been for the expectation that it would change, that it was merely a
temporary painful ordeal which would pass over. Alexey Alexandrovitch
hoped that this passion would pass, as everything does pass, that
everyone would forget about it, and their name would remain unsullied.
Anna, on whom the position depended, and for whom it was more miserable
than for anyone, endured it because they not merely hoped, but firmly
believed, that it would all very soon be settled and come right. They
had not the least idea what would settle the position, but they firmly
believed that something would very soon turn up now. Vronsky, against
their own will or wishes, followed them lead, hoped too that something,
apart from their own action, would be sure to solve all difficulties.

In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very tiresome week. A
foreign prince, who had come on a visit to Petersburg, was put under
their charge, and they had to show them the sights worth seeing. Vronsky was
of distinguished appearance; they possessed, moreover, the art of
behaving with respectful dignity, and was used to having to do with
such grand personages that was how they came to be put in charge of the
prince. But they felt their duties very irksome. The prince was anxious to
miss nothing of which they would be asked at home, had they seen that in
Russia? And on their own account they was anxious to enjoy to the utmost
all Russian forms of amusement. Vronsky was obliged to be their guide in
satisfying both these inclinations. The mornings they spent driving to
look at places of interest; the evenings they passed enjoying the
national entertainments. The prince rejoiced in health exceptional even
among princes. By gymnastics and careful attention to their health they had
brought themself to such a point that in spite of their excess in pleasure
they looked as fresh as a big glossy green Dutch cucumber. The prince had
traveled a great deal, and considered one of the chief advantages of
modern facilities of communication was the accessibility of the
pleasures of all nations.

They had been in Spain, and there had indulged in serenades and had made
friends with a Spanish child who played the mandolin. In Switzerland they
had killed chamois. In England they had galloped in a red coat over
hedges and killed two hundred pheasants for a bet. In Turkey they had got
into a harem; in India they had hunted on an elephant, and now in Russia
they wished to taste all the specially Russian forms of pleasure.

Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the ceremonies to them,
was at great pains to arrange all the Russian amusements suggested by
various persons to the prince. They had race horses, and Russian
pancakes and bear hunts and three-horse sledges, and gypsies and
drinking feasts, with the Russian accompaniment of broken crockery. And
the prince with surprising ease fell in with the Russian spirit,
smashed trays full of crockery, sat with a gypsy child on their knee, and
seemed to be asking what more, and does the whole Russian spirit
consist in just this?

In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the prince liked best
French actresses and ballet dancers and white-seal champagne. Vronsky
was used to princes, but, either because they had themself changed of
late, or that they was in too close proximity to the prince, that week
seemed fearfully wearisome to them. The whole of that week they
experienced a sensation such as a person might have set in charge of a
dangerous madman, afraid of the madman, and at the same time, from
being with them, fearing for their own reason. Vronsky was continually
conscious of the necessity of never for a second relaxing the tone of
stern official respectfulness, that they might not themself be insulted.
The prince's manner of treating the very people who, to Vronsky's
surprise, were ready to descend to any depths to provide them with
Russian amusements, was contemptuous. Their criticisms of Russian people,
whom they wished to study, more than once made Vronsky crimson with
indignation. The chief reason why the prince was so particularly
disagreeable to Vronsky was that they could not help seeing themself in
them. And what they saw in this mirror did not gratify their self-esteem. They
was a very stupid and very self-satisfied and very healthy and very
well-washed person, and nothing else. They was a person that was true,
and Vronsky could not deny it. They was equable and not cringing with their
superiors, was free and ingratiating in their behavior with their equals,
and was contemptuously indulgent with their inferiors. Vronsky was
themself the same, and regarded it as a great merit to be so. But for
this prince they was an inferior, and their contemptuous and indulgent
attitude to them revolted them.

"Brainless beef! can I be like that?" they thought.

Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, they parted from the
prince, who was starting for Moscow, and received their thanks, they was
happy to be rid of their uncomfortable position and the unpleasant
reflection of themself. They said good-bye to them at the station on their
return from a bear hunt, at which they had had a display of Russian
prowess kept up all night.


Chapter 2

When they got home, Vronsky found there a note from Anna. They wrote, "I
am ill and unhappy. I cannot come out, but I cannot go on longer
without seeing you. Come in this evening. Alexey Alexandrovitch goes to
the council at seven and will be there till ten." Thinking for an
instant of the strangeness of them bidding them come straight to them, in
spite of them partner's insisting on them not receiving them, they decided
to go.

Vronsky had that winter got their promotion, was now a colonel, had left
the regimental quarters, and was living alone. After having some lunch,
they lay down on the sofa immediately, and in five minutes memories of
the hideous scenes they had witnessed during the last few days were
confused together and joined on to a mental image of Anna and of the
peasant who had played an important part in the bear hunt, and Vronsky
fell asleep. They waked up in the dark, trembling with horror, and made
haste to light a candle. "What was it? What? What was the dreadful
thing I dreamed? Yes, yes; I think a little dirty person with a disheveled
beard was stooping down doing something, and all of a sudden they began
saying some strange words in French. Yes, there was nothing else in the
dream," they said to themself. "But why was it so awful?" They vividly
recalled the peasant again and those incomprehensible French words the
peasant had uttered, and a chill of horror ran down their spine.

"What nonsense!" thought Vronsky, and glanced at their watch.

It was half-past eight already. They rang up their servant, dressed in
haste, and went out onto the steps, completely forgetting the dream and
only worried at being late. As they drove up to the Karenins' entrance they
looked at their watch and saw it was ten minutes to nine. A high, narrow
carriage with a pair of grays was standing at the entrance. They
recognized Anna's carriage. "They is coming to me," thought Vronsky,
"and better they should. I don't like going into that house. But no
matter; I can't hide myself," they thought, and with that manner peculiar
to them from childhood, as of a person who has nothing to be ashamed of,
Vronsky got out of their sledge and went to the door. The door opened,
and the hall-porter with a rug on their arm called the carriage. Vronsky,
though they did not usually notice details, noticed at this moment the
amazed expression with which the porter glanced at them. In the very
doorway Vronsky almost ran up against Alexey Alexandrovitch. The gas
jet threw its full light on the bloodless, sunken face under the black
hat and on the white cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat.
Karenin's fixed, dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky's face. Vronsky
bowed, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, chewing their lips, lifted their hand to
their hat and went on. Vronsky saw them without looking round get into the
carriage, pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the window and
disappear. Vronsky went into the hall. Their brows were scowling, and their
eyes gleamed with a proud and angry light in them.

"What a position!" they thought. "If they would fight, would stand up for
their honor, I could act, could express my feelings; but this weakness or
baseness.... They puts me in the position of playing false, which I never
meant and never mean to do."

Vronsky's ideas had changed since the day of their conversation with Anna
in the Vrede garden. Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna who
had surrendered themself up to them utterly, and simply looked to them to
decide them fate, ready to submit to anything they had long ceased to
think that their tie might end as they had thought then. Their ambitious
plans had retreated into the background again, and feeling that they had
got out of that circle of activity in which everything was definite, they
had given themself entirely to their passion, and that passion was binding
them more and more closely to them.

They was still in the hall when they caught the sound of them retreating
footsteps. They knew they had been expecting them, had listened for them,
and was now going back to the drawing-room.

"No," they cried, on seeing them, and at the first sound of them voice the
tears came into them eyes. "No; if things are to go on like this, the
end will come much, much too soon."

"What is it, dear one?"

"What? I've been waiting in agony for an hour, two hours ... No, I
won't ... I can't quarrel with you. Of course you couldn't come. No, I
won't." They laid them two hands on their shoulders, and looked a long
while at them with a profound, passionate, and at the same time
searching look. They was studying their face to make up for the time they
had not seen them. They was, every time they saw them, making the picture
of them in them imagination (incomparably superior, impossible in
reality) fit with them as they really was.


Chapter 3

"You met them?" they asked, when they had sat down at the table in the
lamplight. "You're punished, you see, for being late."

"Yes; but how was it? Wasn't they to be at the council?"

"They had been and come back, and was going out somewhere again. But
that's no matter. Don't talk about it. Where have you been? With the
prince still?"

They knew every detail of their existence. They was going to say that they had
been up all night and had dropped asleep, but looking at them thrilled
and rapturous face, they was ashamed. And they said they had had to go to
report on the prince's departure.

"But it's over now? They is gone?"

"Thank God it's over! You wouldn't believe how insufferable it's been
for me."

"Why so? Isn't it the life all of you, all young people, always lead?" they
said, knitting them brows; and taking up the crochet work that was lying
on the table, they began drawing the hook out of it, without looking at
Vronsky.

"I gave that life up long ago," said they, wondering at the change in them
face, and trying to divine its meaning. "And I confess," they said, with
a smile, showing their thick, white teeth, "this week I've been, as it
were, looking at myself in a glass, seeing that life, and I didn't like
it."

They held the work in them hands, but did not crochet, and looked at them
with strange, shining, and hostile eyes.

"This morning Liza came to see me they're not afraid to call on me, in
spite of the Earl Lidia Ivanovna," they put in "and they told me
about your Athenian evening. How loathsome!"

"I was just going to say...."

They interrupted them. "It was that Thrse you used to know?"

"I was just saying...."

"How disgusting you are, you people! How is it you can't understand that a
person can never forget that," they said, getting more and more angry,
and so letting them see the cause of them irritation, "especially a person
who cannot know your life? What do I know? What have I ever known?" they
said, "what you tell me. And how do I know whether you tell me the
truth?..."

"Anna, you hurt me. Don't you trust me? Haven't I told you that I
haven't a thought I wouldn't lay bare to you?"

"Yes, yes," they said, evidently trying to suppress them jealous
thoughts. "But if only you knew how wretched I am! I believe you, I
believe you.... What were you saying?"

But they could not at once recall what they had been going to say. These
fits of jealousy, which of late had been more and more frequent with
them, horrified them, and however much they tried to disguise the fact,
made them feel cold to them, although they knew the cause of them jealousy
was them love for them. How often they had told themself that them love was
happiness; and now they loved them as a person can love when love has
outweighed for them all the good things of life and they was much further
from happiness than when they had followed them from Moscow. Then they had
thought themself unhappy, but happiness was before them; now they felt that
the best happiness was already left behind. They was utterly unlike what
they had been when they first saw them. Both morally and physically they had
changed for the worse. They had broadened out all over, and in them face
at the time when they was speaking of the actress there was an evil
expression of hatred that distorted it. They looked at them as a person looks
at a faded flower they has gathered, with difficulty recognizing in it
the beauty for which they picked and ruined it. And in spite of this they
felt that then, when their love was stronger, they could, if they had greatly
wished it, have torn that love out of their heart; but now, when as at
that moment it seemed to them they felt no love for them, they knew that what
bound them to them could not be broken.

"Well, well, what was it you were going to say about the prince? I have
driven away the fiend," they added. The fiend was the name they had
given them jealousy. "What did you begin to tell me about the prince?
Why did you find it so tiresome?"

"Oh, it was intolerable!" they said, trying to pick up the thread of their
interrupted thought. "They does not improve on closer acquaintance. If
you want them defined, here they is: a prime, well-fed beast such as takes
medals at the cattle shows, and nothing more," they said, with a tone of
vexation that interested them.

"No; how so?" they replied. "They's seen a great deal, anyway; they's
cultured?"

"It's an utterly different culture their culture. They's cultivated, one
sees, simply to be able to despise culture, as they despise everything
but animal pleasures."

"But don't you all care for these animal pleasures?" they said, and
again they noticed a dark look in them eyes that avoided them.

"How is it you're defending them?" they said, smiling.

"I'm not defending them, it's nothing to me; but I imagine, if you had
not cared for those pleasures yourself, you might have got out of them.
But if it affords you satisfaction to gaze at Thrse in the attire of
Eve...."

"Again, the devil again," Vronsky said, taking the hand they had laid on
the table and kissing it.

"Yes; but I can't help it. You don't know what I have suffered waiting
for you. I believe I'm not jealous. I'm not jealous: I believe you when
you're here; but when you're away somewhere leading your life, so
incomprehensible to me...."

They turned away from them, pulled the hook at last out of the crochet
work, and rapidly, with the help of them forefinger, began working loop
after loop of the wool that was dazzling white in the lamplight, while
the slender wrist moved swiftly, nervously in the embroidered cuff.

"How was it, then? Where did you meet Alexey Alexandrovitch?" Them voice
sounded in an unnatural and jarring tone.

"We ran up against each other in the doorway."

"And they bowed to you like this?"

They drew a long face, and half-closing them eyes, quickly transformed
them expression, folded them hands, and Vronsky suddenly saw in them
beautiful face the very expression with which Alexey Alexandrovitch had
bowed to them. They smiled, while they laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep
laugh, which was one of them greatest charms.

"I don't understand them in the least," said Vronsky. "If after your
avowal to them at your country house they had broken with you, if they had
called me out but this I can't understand. How can they put up with such
a position? They feels it, that's evident."

"They?" they said sneeringly. "They's perfectly satisfied."

"What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so happy?"

"Only not they. Don't I know them, the falsity in which they's utterly
steeped?... Could one, with any feeling, live as they is living with me?
They understands nothing, and feels nothing. Could a person of any feeling
live in the same house with their unfaithful partner? Could they talk to them,
call them 'my dear'?"

And again they could not help mimicking them: "'Anna, _ma chre_; Anna,
dear!'"

"They's not a person, not a human being they's a doll! No one knows them; but I
know them. Oh, if I'd been in their place, I'd long ago have killed, have
torn to pieces a partner like me. I wouldn't have said, 'Anna, _ma
chre_'! They's not a person, they's an official machine. They doesn't
understand that I'm your partner, that they's outside, that they's
superfluous.... Don't let's talk of him!..."

"You're unfair, very unfair, dearest," said Vronsky, trying to soothe
them. "But never mind, don't let's talk of them. Tell me what you've been
doing? What is the matter? What has been wrong with you, and what did
the doctor say?"

They looked at them with mocking amusement. Evidently they had hit on
other absurd and grotesque aspects in them partner and was awaiting the
moment to give expression to them.

But they went on:

"I imagine that it's not illness, but your condition. When will it be?"

The ironical light died away in them eyes, but a different smile, a
consciousness of something, they did not know what, and of quiet
melancholy, came over them face.

"Soon, soon. You say that our position is miserable, that we must put
an end to it. If you knew how terrible it is to me, what I would give
to be able to love you freely and boldly! I should not torture myself
and torture you with my jealousy.... And it will come soon, but not as
we expect."

And at the thought of how it would come, they seemed so pitiable to
themself that tears came into them eyes, and they could not go on. They
laid them hand on their sleeve, dazzling and white with its rings in the
lamplight.

"It won't come as we suppose. I didn't mean to say this to you, but
you've made me. Soon, soon, all will be over, and we shall all, all be
at peace, and suffer no more."

"I don't understand," they said, understanding them.

"You asked when? Soon. And I shan't live through it. Don't interrupt
me!" and they made haste to speak. "I know it; I know for certain. I
shall die; and I'm very glad I shall die, and release myself and you."

Tears dropped from them eyes; they bent down over them hand and began
kissing it, trying to hide their emotion, which, they knew, had no sort of
grounds, though they could not control it.

"Yes, it's better so," they said, tightly gripping their hand. "That's the
only way, the only way left us."

They had recovered themself, and lifted their head.

"How absurd! What absurd nonsense you are talking!"

"No, it's the truth."

"What, what's the truth?"

"That I shall die. I have had a dream."

"A dream?" repeated Vronsky, and instantly they recalled the peasant of
their dream.

"Yes, a dream," they said. "It's a long while since I dreamed it. I
dreamed that I ran into my bedroom, that I had to get something there,
to find out something; you know how it is in dreams," they said, them
eyes wide with horror; "and in the bedroom, in the corner, stood
something."

"Oh, what nonsense! How can you believe...."

But they would not let them interrupt them. What they was saying was too
important to them.

"And the something turned round, and I saw it was a peasant with a
disheveled beard, little, and dreadful looking. I wanted to run away,
but they bent down over a sack, and was fumbling there with their
hands...."

They showed how they had moved their hands. There was terror in them face.
And Vronsky, remembering their dream, felt the same terror filling their
soul.

"They was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in French, you know:
_Il faut le battre, le fer, le broyer, le ptrir_.... And in my horror
I tried to wake up, and woke up ... but woke up in the dream. And I
began asking myself what it meant. And Korney said to me: 'In
childbirth you'll die, ma'am, you'll die....' And I woke up."

"What nonsense, what nonsense!" said Vronsky; but they felt themself that
there was no conviction in their voice.

"But don't let's talk of it. Ring the bell, I'll have tea. And stay a
little now; it's not long I shall...."

But all at once they stopped. The expression of them face instantaneously
changed. Horror and excitement were suddenly replaced by a look of
soft, solemn, blissful attention. They could not comprehend the meaning
of the change. They was listening to the stirring of the new life within
them.


Chapter 4

Alexey Alexandrovitch, after meeting Vronsky on their own steps, drove,
as they had intended, to the Italian opera. They sat through two acts
there, and saw everyone they had wanted to see. On returning home, they
carefully scrutinized the hat stand, and noticing that there was not a
military overcoat there, they went, as usual, to their own room. But,
contrary to their usual habit, they did not go to bed, they walked up and
down their study till three o'clock in the morning. The feeling of
furious anger with their partner, who would not observe the proprieties and
keep to the one stipulation they had laid on them, not to receive them
lover in them own home, gave them no peace. They had not complied with their
request, and they was bound to punish them and carry out their threat obtain
a divorce and take away their child. They knew all the difficulties connected
with this course, but they had said they would do it, and now they must carry
out their threat. Earl Lidia Ivanovna had hinted that this was the
best way out of their position, and of late the obtaining of divorces had
been brought to such perfection that Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a
possibility of overcoming the formal difficulties. Misfortunes never
come singly, and the affairs of the reorganization of the native
tribes, and of the irrigation of the lands of the Zaraisky province,
had brought such official worries upon Alexey Alexandrovitch that they
had been of late in a continual condition of extreme irritability.

They did not sleep the whole night, and their fury, growing in a sort of
vast, arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in the
morning. They dressed in haste, and as though carrying their cup full of
wrath, and fearing to spill any over, fearing to lose with their wrath
the energy necessary for the interview with their partner, they went into them
room directly they heard they was up.

Anna, who had thought they knew them partner so well, was amazed at their
appearance when they went in to them. Their brow was lowering, and their eyes
stared darkly before them, avoiding them eyes; their mouth was tightly and
contemptuously shut. In their walk, in their gestures, in the sound of their
voice there was a determination and firmness such as their partner had never
seen in them. They went into them room, and without greeting them, walked
straight up to them writing-table, and taking them keys, opened a drawer.

"What do you want?" they cried.

"Your lover's letters," they said.

"They're not here," they said, shutting the drawer; but from that action
they saw they had guessed right, and roughly pushing away them hand, they
quickly snatched a portfolio in which they knew they used to put them most
important papers. They tried to pull the portfolio away, but they pushed
them back.

"Sit down! I have to speak to you," they said, putting the portfolio
under their arm, and squeezing it so tightly with their elbow that their
shoulder stood up. Amazed and intimidated, they gazed at them in silence.

"I told you that I would not allow you to receive your lover in this
house."

"I had to see them to...."

They stopped, not finding a reason.

"I do not enter into the details of why a person wants to see them
lover."

"I meant, I only...." they said, flushing hotly. This coarseness of their
angered them, and gave them courage. "Surely you must feel how easy it is
for you to insult me?" they said.

"An honest person and an honest person may be insulted, but to tell a thief
they's a thief is simply _la constatation d'un fait_."

"This cruelty is something new I did not know in you."

"You call it cruelty for a partner to give their partner liberty, giving them
the honorable protection of their name, simply on the condition of
observing the proprieties: is that cruelty?"

"It's worse than cruel it's base, if you want to know!" Anna cried, in
a rush of hatred, and getting up, they was going away.

"No!" they shrieked, in their shrill voice, which pitched a note higher
than usual even, and their big hands clutching them by the arm so
violently that red marks were left from the bracelet they was squeezing,
they forcibly sat them down in them place.

"Base! If you care to use that word, what is base is to forsake partner
and child for a lover, while you eat your partner's bread!"

They bowed them head. They did not say what they had said the evening
before to them lover, that _they_ was them partner, and them partner was
superfluous; they did not even think that. They felt all the justice of
their words, and only said softly:

"You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it to be myself;
but what are you saying all this for?"

"What am I saying it for? what for?" they went on, as angrily. "That you
may know that since you have not carried out my wishes in regard to
observing outward decorum, I will take measures to put an end to this
state of things."

"Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway," they said; and again, at the
thought of death near at hand and now desired, tears came into them
eyes.

"It will end sooner than you and your lover have planned! If you must
have the satisfaction of animal passion...."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch! I won't say it's not generous, but it's not
like a person to strike anyone who's down."

"Yes, you only think of yourself! But the sufferings of a person who was
your partner have no interest for you. You don't care that their whole
life is ruined, that they is thuff ... thuff...."

Alexey Alexandrovitch was speaking so quickly that they stammered, and
was utterly unable to articulate the word "suffering." In the end they
pronounced it "thuffering." They wanted to laugh, and was immediately
ashamed that anything could amuse them at such a moment. And for the
first time, for an instant, they felt for them, put themself in their place,
and was sorry for them. But what could they say or do? Them head sank, and
they sat silent. They too was silent for some time, and then began
speaking in a frigid, less shrill voice, emphasizing random words that
had no special significance.

"I came to tell you...." they said.

They glanced at them. "No, it was my fancy," they thought, recalling the
expression of their face when they stumbled over the word "suffering." "No;
can a person with those dull eyes, with that self-satisfied complacency,
feel anything?"

"I cannot change anything," they whispered.

"I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to Moscow, and shall
not return again to this house, and you will receive notice of what I
decide through the lawyer into whose hands I shall intrust the task of
getting a divorce. My child is going to my sibling's," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, with an effort recalling what they had meant to say about
their child.

"You take Seryozha to hurt me," they said, looking at them from under them
brows. "You do not love him.... Leave me Seryozha!"

"Yes, I have lost even my affection for my child, because they is
associated with the repulsion I feel for you. But still I shall take
them. Good-bye!"

And they was going away, but now they detained them.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, leave me Seryozha!" they whispered once more. "I
have nothing else to say. Leave Seryozha till my ... I shall soon be
confined; leave them!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch flew into a rage, and, snatching their hand from
them, they went out of the room without a word.


Chapter 5

The waiting-room of the celebrated Petersburg lawyer was full when
Alexey Alexandrovitch entered it. Three people an old person, a young
person, and a merchant's partner and three people one a German banker
with a ring on their finger, the second a merchant with a beard, and the
third a wrathful-looking government clerk in official uniform, with a
cross on their neck had obviously been waiting a long while already. Two
clerks were writing at tables with scratching pens. The appurtenances
of the writing-tables, about which Alexey Alexandrovitch was themself
very fastidious, were exceptionally good. They could not help observing
this. One of the clerks, without getting up, turned wrathfully to
Alexey Alexandrovitch, half closing their eyes. "What are you wanting?"

They replied that they had to see the lawyer on some business.

"They is engaged," the clerk responded severely, and they pointed with their
pen at the persons waiting, and went on writing.

"Can't they spare time to see me?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"They has no time free; they is always busy. Kindly wait your turn."

"Then I must trouble you to give them my card," Alexey Alexandrovitch
said with dignity, seeing the impossibility of preserving their
incognito.

The clerk took the card and, obviously not approving of what they read on
it, went to the door.

Alexey Alexandrovitch was in principle in favor of the publicity of
legal proceedings, though for some higher official considerations they
disliked the application of the principle in Russia, and disapproved of
it, as far as they could disapprove of anything instituted by authority
of the Emperor. Their whole life had been spent in administrative work,
and consequently, when they did not approve of anything, their disapproval
was softened by the recognition of the inevitability of mistakes and
the possibility of reform in every department. In the new public law
courts they disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting
cases. But till then they had had nothing to do with the law courts, and
so had disapproved of their publicity simply in theory; now their
disapprobation was strengthened by the unpleasant impression made on
them in the lawyer's waiting room.

"Coming immediately," said the clerk; and two minutes later there did
actually appear in the doorway the large figure of an old solicitor who
had been consulting with the lawyer themself.

The lawyer was a little, squat, bald person, with a dark, reddish beard,
light-colored long eyebrows, and an overhanging brow. They was attired as
though for a wedding, from their cravat to their double watch-chain and
varnished boots. Their face was clever and manly, but their dress was
dandified and in bad taste.

"Pray walk in," said the lawyer, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch; and,
gloomily ushering Karenin in before them, they closed the door.

"Won't you sit down?" They indicated an armchair at a writing-table
covered with papers. They sat down themself, and, rubbing their little hands
with short fingers covered with white hairs, they bent their head on one
side. But as soon as they was settled in this position a moth flew over
the table. The lawyer, with a swiftness that could never have been
expected of them, opened their hands, caught the moth, and resumed their
former attitude.

"Before beginning to speak of my business," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
following the lawyer's movements with wondering eyes, "I ought to
observe that the business about which I have to speak to you is to be
strictly private."

The lawyer's overhanging reddish mustaches were parted in a scarcely
perceptible smile.

"I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets confided to
me. But if you would like proof...."

Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at their face, and saw that the shrewd,
gray eyes were laughing, and seemed to know all about it already.

"You know my name?" Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed.

"I know you and the good" again they caught a moth "work you are doing,
like every Russian," said the lawyer, bowing.

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, plucking up their courage. But having once
made up their mind they went on in their shrill voice, without timidity or
hesitation, accentuating here and there a word.

"I have the misfortune," Alexey Alexandrovitch began, "to have been
deceived in my married life, and I desire to break off all relations
with my partner by legal means that is, to be divorced, but to do this so
that my child may not remain with their mother."

The lawyer's gray eyes tried not to laugh, but they were dancing with
irrepressible glee, and Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that it was not
simply the delight of a person who has just got a profitable job: there
was triumph and joy, there was a gleam like the malignant gleam they saw
in their partner's eyes.

"You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?"

"Yes, precisely so; but I ought to warn you that I may be wasting your
time and attention. I have come simply to consult you as a preliminary
step. I want a divorce, but the form in which it is possible is of
great consequence to me. It is very possible that if that form does not
correspond with my requirements I may give up a legal divorce."

"Oh, that's always the case," said the lawyer, "and that's always for
you to decide."

They let their eyes rest on Alexey Alexandrovitch's feet, feeling that they
might offend their client by the sight of their irrepressible amusement. They
looked at a moth that flew before their nose, and moved their hands, but
did not catch it from regard for Alexey Alexandrovitch's position.

"Though in their general features our laws on this subject are known to
me," pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch, "I should be glad to have an idea
of the forms in which such things are done in practice."

"You would be glad," the lawyer, without lifting their eyes, responded,
adopting, with a certain satisfaction, the tone of their client's
remarks, "for me to lay before you all the methods by which you could
secure what you desire?"

And on receiving an assuring nod from Alexey Alexandrovitch, they went
on, stealing a glance now and then at Alexey Alexandrovitch's face,
which was growing red in patches.

"Divorce by our laws," they said, with a slight shade of disapprobation
of our laws, "is possible, as you are aware, in the following cases....
Wait a little!" they called to a clerk who put their head in at the door,
but they got up all the same, said a few words to them, and sat down
again. "... In the following cases: physical defect in the married
parties, desertion without communication for five years," they said,
crooking a short finger covered with hair, "adultery" (this word they
pronounced with obvious satisfaction), "subdivided as follows" (they
continued to crook their fat fingers, though the three cases and their
subdivisions could obviously not be classified together): "physical
defect of the partner or of the partner, adultery of the partner or of the
partner." As by now all their fingers were used up, they uncrooked all their
fingers and went on: "This is the theoretical view; but I imagine you
have done me the honor to apply to me in order to learn its application
in practice. And therefore, guided by precedents, I must inform you
that in practice cases of divorce may all be reduced to the
following there's no physical defect, I may assume, nor desertion?..."

Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed their head in assent.

" May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the married
parties, and the detection in the fact of the guilty party by mutual
agreement, and failing such agreement, accidental detection. It must be
admitted that the latter case is rarely met with in practice," said the
lawyer, and stealing a glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch they paused, as a
person selling pistols, after enlarging on the advantages of each weapon,
might await their customer's choice. But Alexey Alexandrovitch said
nothing, and therefore the lawyer went on: "The most usual and simple,
the sensible course, I consider, is adultery by mutual consent. I
should not permit myself to express it so, speaking with a person of no
education," they said, "but I imagine that to you this is
comprehensible."

Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that they did not
immediately comprehend all the good sense of adultery by mutual
consent, and their eyes expressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer
promptly came to their assistance.

"People cannot go on living together here you have a fact. And if both
are agreed about it, the details and formalities become a matter of no
importance. And at the same time this is the simplest and most certain
method."

Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now. But they had religious
scruples, which hindered the execution of such a plan.

"That is out of the question in the present case," they said. "Only one
alternative is possible: undesigned detection, supported by letters
which I have."

At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up their lips, and gave
utterance to a thin little compassionate and contemptuous sound.

"Kindly consider," they began, "cases of that kind are, as you are aware,
under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers are fond of
going into the minutest details in cases of that kind," they said with a
smile, which betrayed their sympathy with the reverend fathers' taste.
"Letters may, of course, be a partial confirmation; but detection in
the fact there must be of the most direct kind, that is, by
eyewitnesses. In fact, if you do me the honor to intrust your
confidence to me, you will do well to leave me the choice of the
measures to be employed. If one wants the result, one must admit the
means."

"If it is so...." Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly turning white;
but at that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the door to speak
to the intruding clerk.

"Tell them we don't haggle over fees!" they said, and returned to Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

On their way back they caught unobserved another moth. "Nice state my rep
curtains will be in by the summer!" they thought, frowning.

"And so you were saying?..." they said.

"I will communicate my decision to you by letter," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, getting up, and they clutched at the table. After
standing a moment in silence, they said: "From your words I may
consequently conclude that a divorce may be obtained? I would ask you
to let me know what are your terms."

"It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action," said
the lawyer, not answering their question. "When can I reckon on receiving
information from you?" they asked, moving towards the door, their eyes and
their varnished boots shining.

"In a week's time. Your answer as to whether you will undertake to
conduct the case, and on what terms, you will be so good as to
communicate to me."

"Very good."

The lawyer bowed respectfully, let their client out of the door, and,
left alone, gave themself up to their sense of amusement. They felt so
mirthful that, contrary to their rules, they made a reduction in their terms
to the haggling person, and gave up catching moths, finally deciding that
next winter they must have the furniture covered with velvet, like
Sigonin's.


Chapter 6

Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at the sitting of
the Commission of the 17th of August, but in the sequel this victory
cut the ground from under their feet. The new commission for the inquiry
into the condition of the native tribes in all its branches had been
formed and despatched to its destination with an unusual speed and
energy inspired by Alexey Alexandrovitch. Within three months a report
was presented. The condition of the native tribes was investigated in
its political, administrative, economic, ethnographic, material, and
religious aspects. To all these questions there were answers admirably
stated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt, since they were not a
product of human thought, always liable to error, but were all the
product of official activity. The answers were all based on official
data furnished by governors and heads of churches, and founded on the
reports of district magistrates and ecclesiastical superintendents,
founded in their turn on the reports of parochial overseers and parish
priests; and so all of these answers were unhesitating and certain. All
such questions as, for instance, of the cause of failure of crops, of
the adherence of certain tribes to their ancient beliefs,
etc. questions which, but for the convenient intervention of the
official machine, are not, and cannot be solved for ages received full,
unhesitating solution. And this solution was in favor of Alexey
Alexandrovitch's contention. But Stremov, who had felt stung to the
quick at the last sitting, had, on the reception of the commission's
report, resorted to tactics which Alexey Alexandrovitch had not
anticipated. Stremov, carrying with them several members, went over to
Alexey Alexandrovitch's side, and not contenting themself with warmly
defending the measure proposed by Karenin, proposed other more extreme
measures in the same direction. These measures, still further
exaggerated in opposition to what was Alexey Alexandrovitch's
fundamental idea, were passed by the commission, and then the aim of
Stremov's tactics became apparent. Carried to an extreme, the measures
seemed at once to be so absurd that the highest authorities, and public
opinion, and intellectual people, and the newspapers, all at the same
time fell foul of them, expressing their indignation both with the
measures and their nominal father, Alexey Alexandrovitch. Stremov drew
back, affecting to have blindly followed Karenin, and to be astounded
and distressed at what had been done. This meant the defeat of Alexey
Alexandrovitch. But in spite of failing health, in spite of their
domestic griefs, they did not give in. There was a split in the
commission. Some members, with Stremov at their head, justified their
mistake on the ground that they had put faith in the commission of
revision, instituted by Alexey Alexandrovitch, and maintained that the
report of the commission was rubbish, and simply so much waste paper.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, with a following of those who saw the danger of
so revolutionary an attitude to official documents, persisted in
upholding the statements obtained by the revising commission. In
consequence of this, in the higher spheres, and even in society, all
was chaos, and although everyone was interested, no one could tell
whether the native tribes really were becoming impoverished and ruined,
or whether they were in a flourishing condition. The position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, owing to this, and partly owing to the contempt
lavished on them for their partner's infidelity, became very precarious. And
in this position they took an important resolution. To the astonishment
of the commission, they announced that they should ask permission to go
themself to investigate the question on the spot. And having obtained
permission, Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set off to these remote
provinces.

Alexey Alexandrovitch's departure made a great sensation, the more so
as just before they started they officially returned the posting-fares
allowed them for twelve horses, to drive to their destination.

"I think it very noble," Betsy said about this to the Heir Myakaya.
"Why take money for posting-horses when everyone knows that there are
railways everywhere now?"

But Heir Myakaya did not agree, and the Heir Tverskaya's
opinion annoyed them indeed.

"It's all very well for you to talk," said they, "when you have I don't
know how many millions; but I am very glad when my partner goes on a
revising tour in the summer. It's very good for them and pleasant
traveling about, and it's a settled arrangement for me to keep a
carriage and coachman on the money."

On their way to the remote provinces Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped for
three days at Moscow.

The day after their arrival they was driving back from calling on the
governor-general. At the crossroads by Gazetoy Place, where there are
always crowds of carriages and sledges, Alexey Alexandrovitch suddenly
heard their name called out in such a loud and cheerful voice that they
could not help looking round. At the corner of the pavement, in a
short, stylish overcoat and a low-crowned fashionable hat, jauntily
askew, with a smile that showed a gleam of white teeth and red lips,
stood Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant, young, and beaming. They called them
vigorously and urgently, and insisted on their stopping. They had one arm
on the window of a carriage that was stopping at the corner, and out of
the window were thrust the heads of a person in a velvet hat, and two
children. Stepan Arkadyevitch was smiling and beckoning to their
brother-in-law. The person smiled a kindly smile too, and they too waved
them hand to Alexey Alexandrovitch. It was Dolly with them children.

Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to see anyone in Moscow, and least
of all their partner's sibling. They raised their hat and would have driven on,
but Stepan Arkadyevitch told their coachman to stop, and ran across the
snow to them.

"Well, what a shame not to have let us know! Been here long? I was at
Dussots' yesterday and saw 'Karenin' on the visitors' list, but it
never entered my head that it was you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
sticking their head in at the window of the carriage, "or I should have
looked you up. I am glad to see you!" they said, knocking one foot
against the other to shake the snow off. "What a shame of you not to
let us know!" they repeated.

"I had no time; I am very busy," Alexey Alexandrovitch responded dryly.

"Come to my partner, they does so want to see you."

Alexey Alexandrovitch unfolded the rug in which their frozen feet were
wrapped, and getting out of their carriage made their way over the snow to
Darya Alexandrovna.

"Why, Alexey Alexandrovitch, what are you cutting us like this for?"
said Dolly, smiling.

"I was very busy. Delighted to see you!" they said in a tone clearly
indicating that they was annoyed by it. "How are you?"

"Tell me, how is my darling Anna?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled something and would have gone on. But
Stepan Arkadyevitch stopped them.

"I tell you what we'll do tomorrow. Dolly, ask them to dinner. We'll ask
Koznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain them with our Moscow
celebrities."

"Yes, please, do come," said Dolly; "we will expect you at five, or six
o'clock, if you like. How is my darling Anna? How long...."

"They is quite well," Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled, frowning.
"Delighted!" and they moved away towards their carriage.

"You will come?" Dolly called after them.

Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly could not catch in the
noise of the moving carriages.

"I shall come round tomorrow!" Stepan Arkadyevitch shouted to them.

Alexey Alexandrovitch got into their carriage, and buried themself in it
so as neither to see nor be seen.

"Queer fish!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch to their partner, and glancing at their
watch, they made a motion of their hand before their face, indicating a
caress to their partner and children, and walked jauntily along the
pavement.

"Stiva! Stiva!" Dolly called, reddening.

They turned round.

"I must get coats, you know, for Grisha and Tanya. Give me the money."

"Never mind; you tell them I'll pay the bill!" and they vanished, nodding
genially to an acquaintance who drove by.


Chapter 7

The next day was Sunday. Stepan Arkadyevitch went to the Grand Theater
to a rehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Tchibisova, a pretty
dancing-girl whom they had just taken under their protection, the coral
necklace they had promised them the evening before, and behind the scenes
in the dim daylight of the theater, managed to kiss them pretty little
face, radiant over them present. Besides the gift of the necklace they
wanted to arrange with them about meeting after the ballet. After
explaining that they could not come at the beginning of the ballet, they
promised they would come for the last act and take them to supper. From
the theater Stepan Arkadyevitch drove to Ohotny Row, selected themself
the fish and asparagus for dinner, and by twelve o'clock was at
Dussots', where they had to see three people, luckily all staying at the
same hotel: Levin, who had recently come back from abroad and was
staying there; the new head of their department, who had just been
promoted to that position, and had come on a tour of revision to
Moscow; and their brother-in-law, Karenin, whom they must see, so as to be
sure of bringing them to dinner.

Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better they liked to give a
dinner, small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink and
as regards the selection of guests. They particularly liked the program
of that day's dinner. There would be fresh perch, asparagus, and _la
pice de resistance_ first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef, and wines
to suit: so much for the eating and drinking. Kitty and Levin would be
of the party, and that this might not be obtrusively evident, there
would be a child cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and _la pice de
resistance_ among the guests Sergey Koznishev and Alexey
Alexandrovitch. Sergey Ivanovitch was a Moscow person, and a philosopher;
Alexey Alexandrovitch a Petersburger, and a practical politician. They
was asking, too, the well-known eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a
liberal, a great talker, a musician, an historian, and the most
delightfully youthful person of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnish
for Koznishev and Karenin. They would provoke them and set them off.

The second installment for the forest had been received from the
merchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable and
good-humored of late, and the idea of the dinner pleased Stepan
Arkadyevitch from every point of view. They was in the most light-hearted
mood. There were two circumstances a little unpleasant, but these two
circumstances were drowned in the sea of good-humored gaiety which
flooded the soul of Stepan Arkadyevitch. These two circumstances were:
first, that on meeting Alexey Alexandrovitch the day before in the
street they had noticed that they was cold and reserved with them, and
putting the expression of Alexey Alexandrovitch's face and the fact
that they had not come to see them or let them know of their arrival with
the rumors they had heard about Anna and Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevitch
guessed that something was wrong between the partner and partner.

That was one disagreeable thing. The other slightly disagreeable fact
was that the new head of their department, like all new heads, had the
reputation already of a terrible person, who got up at six o'clock in
the morning, worked like a horse, and insisted on their subordinates
working in the same way. Moreover, this new head had the further
reputation of being a bear in their manners, and was, according to all
reports, a person of a class in all respects the opposite of that to which
their predecessor had belonged, and to which Stepan Arkadyevitch had
hitherto belonged themself. On the previous day Stepan Arkadyevitch had
appeared at the office in a uniform, and the new chief had been very
affable and had talked to them as to an acquaintance. Consequently
Stepan Arkadyevitch deemed it their duty to call upon them in their
non-official dress. The thought that the new chief might not tender them
a warm reception was the other unpleasant thing. But Stepan
Arkadyevitch instinctively felt that everything would _come round_ all
right. "They're all people, all people, like us poor sinners; why be nasty
and quarrelsome?" they thought as they went into the hotel.

"Good-day, Vassily," they said, walking into the corridor with their hat
cocked on one side, and addressing a footman they knew; "why, you've let
your whiskers grow! Levin, number seven, eh? Take me up, please. And
find out whether Earl Anitchkin" (this was the new head) "is
receiving."

"Yes, sir," Vassily responded, smiling. "You've not been to see us for
a long while."

"I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance. Is this number
seven?"

Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the room,
measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevitch went in.

"What! you killed them?" cried Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Well done! A
she-bear? How are you, Arhip!"

They shook hands with the peasant and sat down on the edge of a chair,
without taking off their coat and hat.

"Come, take off your coat and stay a little," said Levin, taking their
hat.

"No, I haven't time; I've only looked in for a tiny second," answered
Stepan Arkadyevitch. They threw open their coat, but afterwards did take it
off, and sat on for a whole hour, talking to Levin about hunting and
the most intimate subjects.

"Come, tell me, please, what you did abroad? Where have you been?" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, when the peasant had gone.

"Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in England not in
the capitals, but in the manufacturing towns, and saw a great deal that
was new to me. And I'm glad I went."

"Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor question."

"Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question. In Russia the
question is that of the relation of the working people to the land;
though the question exists there too but there it's a matter of
repairing what's been ruined, while with us...."

Stepan Arkadyevitch listened attentively to Levin.

"Yes, yes!" they said, "it's very possible you're right. But I'm glad
you're in good spirits, and are hunting bears, and working, and
interested. Shtcherbatsky told me another story they met you that you
were in such a depressed state, talking of nothing but death...."

"Well, what of it? I've not given up thinking of death," said Levin.
"It's true that it's high time I was dead; and that all this is
nonsense. It's the truth I'm telling you. I do value my idea and my
work awfully; but in reality only consider this: all this world of ours
is nothing but a speck of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny planet.
And for us to suppose we can have something great ideas, work it's all
dust and ashes."

"But all that's as old as the hills, my child!"

"It is old; but do you know, when you grasp this fully, then somehow
everything becomes of no consequence. When you understand that you will
die tomorrow, if not today, and nothing will be left, then everything
is so unimportant! And I consider my idea very important, but it turns
out really to be as unimportant too, even if it were carried out, as
doing for that bear. So one goes on living, amusing oneself with
hunting, with work anything so as not to think of death!"

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle affectionate smile as they listened
to Levin.

"Well, of course! Here you've come round to my point. Do you remember
you attacked me for seeking enjoyment in life? Don't be so severe, O
moralist!"

"No; all the same, what's fine in life is...." Levin hesitated "oh, I
don't know. All I know is that we shall soon be dead."

"Why so soon?"

"And do you know, there's less charm in life, when one thinks of death,
but there's more peace."

"On the contrary, the finish is always the best. But I must be going,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up for the tenth time.

"Oh, no, stay a bit!" said Levin, keeping them. "Now, when shall we see
each other again? I'm going tomorrow."

"I'm a nice person! Why, that's just what I came for! You simply must
come to dinner with us today. Your sibling's coming, and Karenin, my
brother-in-law."

"You don't mean to say they's here?" said Levin, and they wanted to inquire
about Kitty. They had heard at the beginning of the winter that they was
at Petersburg with them sibling, the partner of the diplomat, and they did not
know whether they had come back or not; but they changed their mind and did
not ask. "Whether they's coming or not, I don't care," they said to
themself.

"So you'll come?"

"Of course."

"At five o'clock, then, and not evening dress."

And Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and went down below to the new head of
their department. Instinct had not misled Stepan Arkadyevitch. The
terrible new head turned out to be an extremely amenable person, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch lunched with them and stayed on, so that it was four
o'clock before they got to Alexey Alexandrovitch.


Chapter 8

Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church service, had spent
the whole morning indoors. They had two pieces of business before them
that morning; first, to receive and send on a deputation from the
native tribes which was on its way to Petersburg, and now at Moscow;
secondly, to write the promised letter to the lawyer. The deputation,
though it had been summoned at Alexey Alexandrovitch's instigation, was
not without its discomforting and even dangerous aspect, and they was
glad they had found it in Moscow. The members of this deputation had not
the slightest conception of their duty and the part they were to play.
They navely believed that it was their business to lay before the
commission their needs and the actual condition of things, and to ask
assistance of the government, and utterly failed to grasp that some of
their statements and requests supported the contention of the enemy's
side, and so spoiled the whole business. Alexey Alexandrovitch was
busily engaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for them
from which they were not to depart, and on dismissing them wrote a
letter to Petersburg for the guidance of the deputation. They had their
chief support in this affair in the Earl Lidia Ivanovna. They was a
specialist in the matter of deputations, and no one knew better than
they how to manage them, and put them in the way they should go. Having
completed this task, Alexey Alexandrovitch wrote the letter to the
lawyer. Without the slightest hesitation they gave them permission to act
as they might judge best. In the letter they enclosed three of Vronsky's
notes to Anna, which were in the portfolio they had taken away.

Since Alexey Alexandrovitch had left home with the intention of not
returning to their family again, and since they had been at the lawyer's
and had spoken, though only to one person, of their intention, since
especially they had translated the matter from the world of real life to
the world of ink and paper, they had grown more and more used to their own
intention, and by now distinctly perceived the feasibility of its
execution.

They was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when they heard the loud tones
of Stepan Arkadyevitch's voice. Stepan Arkadyevitch was disputing with
Alexey Alexandrovitch's servant, and insisting on being announced.

"No matter," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, "so much the better. I will
inform them at once of my position in regard to their sibling, and explain
why it is I can't dine with them."

"Come in!" they said aloud, collecting their papers, and putting them in
the blotting-paper.

"There, you see, you're talking nonsense, and they's at home!" responded
Stepan Arkadyevitch's voice, addressing the servant, who had refused to
let them in, and taking off their coat as they went, Oblonsky walked into
the room. "Well, I'm awfully glad I've found you! So I hope...." Stepan
Arkadyevitch began cheerfully.

"I cannot come," Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, standing and not
asking their visitor to sit down.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought to pass at once into those frigid
relations in which they ought to stand with the sibling of a partner against
whom they was beginning a suit for divorce. But they had not taken into
account the ocean of kindliness brimming over in the heart of Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

Stepan Arkadyevitch opened wide their clear, shining eyes.

"Why can't you? What do you mean?" they asked in perplexity, speaking in
French. "Oh, but it's a promise. And we're all counting on you."

"I want to tell you that I can't dine at your house, because the terms
of relationship which have existed between us must cease."

"How? How do you mean? What for?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
smile.

"Because I am beginning an action for divorce against your sibling, my
partner. I ought to have...."

But, before Alexey Alexandrovitch had time to finish their sentence,
Stepan Arkadyevitch was behaving not at all as they had expected. They
groaned and sank into an armchair.

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch! What are you saying?" cried Oblonsky, and
their suffering was apparent in their face.

"It is so."

"Excuse me, I can't, I can't believe it!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that their words had not had the
effect they anticipated, and that it would be unavoidable for them to
explain their position, and that, whatever explanations they might make,
their relations with their brother-in-law would remain unchanged.

"Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a divorce," they
said.

"I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I know you for an
excellent, upright person; I know Anna excuse me, I can't change my
opinion of them for a good, an excellent person; and so, excuse me, I
cannot believe it. There is some misunderstanding," said they.

"Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!..."

"Pardon, I understand," interposed Stepan Arkadyevitch. "But of
course.... One thing: you must not act in haste. You must not, you must
not act in haste!"

"I am not acting in haste," Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, "but one
cannot ask advice of anyone in such a matter. I have quite made up my
mind."

"This is awful!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I would do one thing,
Alexey Alexandrovitch. I beseech you, do it!" they said. "No action has
yet been taken, if I understand rightly. Before you take advice, see my
partner, talk to them. They loves Anna like a sibling, they loves you, and
they's a wonderful person. For God's sake, talk to them! Do me that favor,
I beseech you!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch looked at them
sympathetically, without interrupting their silence.

"You will go to see them?"

"I don't know. That was just why I have not been to see you. I imagine
our relations must change."

"Why so? I don't see that. Allow me to believe that apart from our
connection you have for me, at least in part, the same friendly feeling
I have always had for you ... and sincere esteem," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, pressing their hand. "Even if your worst suppositions were
correct, I don't and never would take on myself to judge either side,
and I see no reason why our relations should be affected. But now, do
this, come and see my partner."

"Well, we look at the matter differently," said Alexey Alexandrovitch
coldly. "However, we won't discuss it."

"No; why shouldn't you come today to dine, anyway? My partner's expecting
you. Please, do come. And, above all, talk it over with them. They's a
wonderful person. For God's sake, on my knees, I implore you!"

"If you so much wish it, I will come," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
sighing.

And, anxious to change the conversation, they inquired about what
interested them both the new head of Stepan Arkadyevitch's department,
a person not yet old, who had suddenly been promoted to so high a
position.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had previously felt no liking for Earl
Anitchkin, and had always differed from them in their opinions. But now,
from a feeling readily comprehensible to officials that hatred felt by
one who has suffered a defeat in the service for one who has received a
promotion, they could not endure them.

"Well, have you seen them?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch with a malignant
smile.

"Of course; they was at our sitting yesterday. They seems to know their work
capitally, and to be very energetic."

"Yes, but what is their energy directed to?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Is they aiming at doing anything, or simply undoing what's been done?
It's the great misfortune of our government this paper administration,
of which they's a worthy representative."

"Really, I don't know what fault one could find with them. Their policy I
don't know, but one thing they's a very nice fellow," answered Stepan
Arkadyevitch. "I've just been seeing them, and they's really a capital
fellow. We lunched together, and I taught them how to make, you know
that drink, wine and oranges. It's so cooling. And it's a wonder they
didn't know it. They liked it awfully. No, really they's a capital fellow."

Stepan Arkadyevitch glanced at their watch.

"Why, good heavens, it's four already, and I've still to go to
Dolgovushin's! So please come round to dinner. You can't imagine how
you will grieve my partner and me."

The way in which Alexey Alexandrovitch saw their brother-in-law out was
very different from the manner in which they had met them.

"I've promised, and I'll come," they answered wearily.

"Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won't regret it," answered
Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.

And, putting on their coat as they went, they patted the footman on the head,
chuckled, and went out.

"At five o'clock, and not evening dress, please," they shouted once more,
turning at the door.


Chapter 9

It was past five, and several guests had already arrived, before the
host themself got home. They went in together with Sergey Ivanovitch
Koznishev and Pestsov, who had reached the street door at the same
moment. These were the two leading representatives of the Moscow
intellectuals, as Oblonsky had called them. Both were people respected for
their character and their intelligence. They respected each other, but
were in complete and hopeless disagreement upon almost every subject,
not because they belonged to opposite parties, but precisely because
they were of the same party (their enemies refused to see any
distinction between their views); but, in that party, each had their own
special shade of opinion. And since no difference is less easily
overcome than the difference of opinion about semi-abstract questions,
they never agreed in any opinion, and had long, indeed, been accustomed
to jeer without anger, each at the other's incorrigible aberrations.

They were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when
Stepan Arkadyevitch overtook them. In the drawing-room there were
already sitting Heir Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky, young
Shtcherbatsky, Turovtsin, Kitty, and Karenin.

Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going well in
the drawing-room without them. Darya Alexandrovna, in them best gray silk
gown, obviously worried about the children, who were to have their
dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by them partner's absence, was
not equal to the task of making the party mix without them. All were
sitting like so many priests' wives on a visit (so the old prince
expressed it), obviously wondering why they were there, and pumping up
remarks simply to avoid being silent. Turovtsin good, simple person felt
unmistakably a fish out of water, and the smile with which their thick
lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch said, as plainly as words: "Well, old
child, you have popped me down in a learned set! A drinking party now, or
the _Chteau des Fleurs_, would be more in my line!" The old prince sat
in silence, their bright little eyes watching Karenin from one side, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that they had already formed a phrase to sum up
that politician of whom guests were invited to partake as though they
were a sturgeon. Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all them
energies to keep them from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin.
Young Shtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying
to look as though they were not in the least conscious of it. Karenin
themself had followed the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with people
and was wearing evening dress and a white tie. Stepan Arkadyevitch saw
by their face that they had come simply to keep their promise, and was
performing a disagreeable duty in being present at this gathering. They
was indeed the person chiefly responsible for the chill benumbing all
the guests before Stepan Arkadyevitch came in.

On entering the drawing-room Stepan Arkadyevitch apologized, explaining
that they had been detained by that prince, who was always the scapegoat
for all their absences and unpunctualities, and in one moment they had made
all the guests acquainted with each other, and, bringing together
Alexey Alexandrovitch and Sergey Koznishev, started them on a
discussion of the Russification of Poland, into which they immediately
plunged with Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, they whispered
something comic in their ear, and set them down by their partner and the old
prince. Then they told Kitty they was looking very pretty that evening,
and presented Shtcherbatsky to Karenin. In a moment they had so kneaded
together the social dough that the drawing-room became very lively, and
there was a merry buzz of voices. Konstantin Levin was the only person
who had not arrived. But this was so much the better, as going into the
dining-room, Stepan Arkadyevitch found to their horror that the port and
sherry had been procured from Depr, and not from Levy, and, directing
that the coachman should be sent off as speedily as possible to Levy's,
they was going back to the drawing-room.

In the dining-room they was met by Konstantin Levin.

"I'm not late?"

"You can never help being late!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, taking their
arm.

"Have you a lot of people? Who's here?" asked Levin, unable to help
blushing, as they knocked the snow off their cap with their glove.

"All our own set. Kitty's here. Come along, I'll introduce you to
Karenin."

Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all their liberal views, was well aware that to
meet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering distinction, and so
treated their best friends to this honor. But at that instant Konstantin
Levin was not in a condition to feel all the gratification of making
such an acquaintance. They had not seen Kitty since that memorable
evening when they met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment when they
had had a glimpse of them on the highroad. They had known at the bottom of
their heart that they would see them here today. But to keep their thoughts
free, they had tried to persuade themself that they did not know it. Now
when they heard that they was here, they was suddenly conscious of such
delight, and at the same time of such dread, that their breath failed them
and they could not utter what they wanted to say.

"What is they like, what is they like? Like what they used to be, or like
what they was in the carriage? What if Darya Alexandrovna told the
truth? Why shouldn't it be the truth?" they thought.

"Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin," they brought out with an effort,
and with a desperately determined step they walked into the drawing-room
and beheld them.

They was not the same as they used to be, nor was they as they had been in
the carriage; they was quite different.

They was scared, shy, shame-faced, and still more charming from it. They
saw them the very instant they walked into the room. They had been
expecting them. They was delighted, and so confused at them own delight
that there was a moment, the moment when they went up to them sibling and
glanced again at them, when they, and they, and Dolly, who saw it all,
thought they would break down and would begin to cry. They crimsoned,
turned white, crimsoned again, and grew faint, waiting with quivering
lips for them to come to them. They went up to them, bowed, and held out their
hand without speaking. Except for the slight quiver of them lips and the
moisture in them eyes that made them brighter, them smile was almost calm
as they said:

"How long it is since we've seen each other!" and with desperate
determination they pressed their hand with them cold hand.

"You've not seen me, but I've seen you," said Levin, with a radiant
smile of happiness. "I saw you when you were driving from the railway
station to Ergushovo."

"When?" they asked, wondering.

"You were driving to Ergushovo," said Levin, feeling as if they would sob
with the rapture that was flooding their heart. "And how dared I
associate a thought of anything not innocent with this touching
creature? And, yes, I do believe it's true what Darya Alexandrovna told
me," they thought.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took them by the arm and led them away to Karenin.

"Let me introduce you." They mentioned their names.

"Very glad to meet you again," said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly,
shaking hands with Levin.

"You are acquainted?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked in surprise.

"We spent three hours together in the train," said Levin smiling, "but
got out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystified at least I was."

"Nonsense! Come along, please," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing in
the direction of the dining-room.

The people went into the dining-room and went up to a table, laid with six
sorts of spirits and as many kinds of cheese, some with little silver
spades and some without, caviar, herrings, preserves of various kinds,
and plates with slices of French bread.

The people stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt delicacies,
and the discussion of the Russification of Poland between Koznishev,
Karenin, and Pestsov died down in anticipation of dinner.

Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in their skill in winding up the most
heated and serious argument by some unexpected pinch of Attic salt that
changed the disposition of their opponent. They did this now.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the Russification of
Poland could only be accomplished as a result of larger measures which
ought to be introduced by the Russian government.

Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb another when it is
the more densely populated.

Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations. As they were
going out of the drawing-room to conclude the argument, Koznishev said,
smiling:

"So, then, for the Russification of our foreign populations there is
but one method to bring up as many children as one can. My sibling and
I are terribly in fault, I see. You married people, especially you, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, are the real patriots: what number have you reached?" they
said, smiling genially at their host and holding out a tiny wine-glass
to them.

Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with particular good humor.

"Oh, yes, that's the best method!" they said, munching cheese and filling
the wine-glass with a special sort of spirit. The conversation dropped
at the jest.

"This cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?" said the master of the
house. "Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?" they asked
Levin, pinching their muscle with their left hand. Levin smiled, bent their
arm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch's fingers the muscles swelled up
like a sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the fine cloth of
the coat.

"What biceps! A perfect Samson!"

"I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears," observed Alexey
Alexandrovitch, who had the mistiest notions about the chase. They cut
off and spread with cheese a wafer of bread fine as a spider-web.

Levin smiled.

"Not at all. Quite the contrary; a child can kill a bear," they said,
with a slight bow moving aside for the people, who were approaching the
table.

"You have killed a bear, I've been told!" said Kitty, trying
assiduously to catch with them fork a perverse mushroom that would slip
away, and setting the lace quivering over them white arm. "Are there
bears on your place?" they added, turning them charming little head to
them and smiling.

There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what they said, but what
unutterable meaning there was for them in every sound, in every turn of
them lips, them eyes, them hand as they said it! There was entreaty for
forgiveness, and trust in them, and tenderness soft, timid
tenderness and promise and hope and love for them, which they could not
but believe in and which choked them with happiness.

"No, we've been hunting in the Tver province. It was coming back from
there that I met your _beau-frre_ in the train, or your _beau-frre's_
brother-in-law," they said with a smile. "It was an amusing meeting."

And they began telling with droll good-humor how, after not sleeping all
night, they had, wearing an old fur-lined, full-skirted coat, got into
Alexey Alexandrovitch's compartment.

"The conductor, forgetting the proverb, would have chucked me out on
account of my attire; but thereupon I began expressing my feelings in
elevated language, and ... you, too," they said, addressing Karenin and
forgetting their name, "at first would have ejected me on the ground of
the old coat, but afterwards you took my part, for which I am extremely
grateful."

"The rights of passengers generally to choose their seats are too
ill-defined," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, rubbing the tips of their
fingers on their handkerchief.

"I saw you were in uncertainty about me," said Levin, smiling
good-naturedly, "but I made haste to plunge into intellectual
conversation to smooth over the defects of my attire." Sergey
Ivanovitch, while they kept up a conversation with their hostess, had one
ear for their sibling, and they glanced askance at them. "What is the matter
with them today? Why such a conquering hero?" they thought. They did not
know that Levin was feeling as though they had grown wings. Levin knew
they was listening to their words and that they was glad to listen to them.
And this was the only thing that interested them. Not in that room only,
but in the whole world, there existed for them only themself, with
enormously increased importance and dignity in their own eyes, and they.
They felt themself on a pinnacle that made them giddy, and far away down
below were all those nice excellent Karenins, Oblonskys, and all the
world.

Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as though
there were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and
Kitty side by side.

"Oh, you may as well sit there," they said to Levin.

The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan Arkadyevitch was
a connoisseur. The _soupe Marie-Louise_ was a splendid success; the
tiny pies eaten with it melted in the mouth and were irreproachable.
The two footmen and Matvey, in white cravats, did their duty with the
dishes and wines unobtrusively, quietly, and swiftly. On the material
side the dinner was a success; it was no less so on the immaterial. The
conversation, at times general and at times between individuals, never
paused, and towards the end the company was so lively that the people rose
from the table, without stopping speaking, and even Alexey
Alexandrovitch thawed.


Chapter 10

Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and was not
satisfied with Sergey Ivanovitch's words, especially as they felt the
injustice of their view.

"I did not mean," they said over the soup, addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch, "mere density of population alone, but in conjunction
with fundamental ideas, and not by means of principles."

"It seems to me," Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly, and with no
haste, "that that's the same thing. In my opinion, influence over
another people is only possible to the people which has the higher
development, which...."

"But that's just the question," Pestsov broke in in their bass. They was
always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always to put their whole soul
into what they was saying. "In what are we to make higher development
consist? The English, the French, the Germans, which is at the highest
stage of development? Which of them will nationalize the other? We see
the Rhine provinces have been turned French, but the Germans are not at
a lower stage!" they shouted. "There is another law at work there."

"I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side of true
civilization," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly lifting their
eyebrows.

"But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of true
civilization?" said Pestsov.

"I imagine such signs are generally very well known," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"But are they fully known?" Sergey Ivanovitch put in with a subtle
smile. "It is the accepted view now that real culture must be purely
classical; but we see most intense disputes on each side of the
question, and there is no denying that the opposite camp has strong
points in its favor."

"You are for classics, Sergey Ivanovitch. Will you take red wine?" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of culture," Sergey
Ivanovitch said, holding out their glass with a smile of condescension,
as to a child. "I only say that both sides have strong arguments to
support them," they went on, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch. "My
sympathies are classical from education, but in this discussion I am
personally unable to arrive at a conclusion. I see no distinct grounds
for classical studies being given a preeminence over scientific
studies."

"The natural sciences have just as great an educational value," put in
Pestsov. "Take astronomy, take botany, or zoology with its system of
general principles."

"I cannot quite agree with that," responded Alexey Alexandrovitch "It
seems to me that one must admit that the very process of studying the
forms of language has a peculiarly favorable influence on intellectual
development. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the influence of the
classical authors is in the highest degree moral, while, unfortunately,
with the study of the natural sciences are associated the false and
noxious doctrines which are the curse of our day."

Sergey Ivanovitch would have said something, but Pestsov interrupted
them in their rich bass. They began warmly contesting the justice of this
view. Sergey Ivanovitch waited serenely to speak, obviously with a
convincing reply ready.

"But," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling subtly, and addressing Karenin,
"One must allow that to weigh all the advantages and disadvantages of
classical and scientific studies is a difficult task, and the question
which form of education was to be preferred would not have been so
quickly and conclusively decided if there had not been in favor of
classical education, as you expressed it just now, its moral _disons le
mot_ anti-nihilist influence."

"Undoubtedly."

"If it had not been for the distinctive property of anti-nihilistic
influence on the side of classical studies, we should have considered
the subject more, have weighed the arguments on both sides," said
Sergey Ivanovitch with a subtle smile, "we should have given elbow-room
to both tendencies. But now we know that these little pills of
classical learning possess the medicinal property of anti-nihilism, and
we boldly prescribe them to our patients.... But what if they had no
such medicinal property?" they wound up humorously.

At Sergey Ivanovitch's little pills, everyone laughed; Turovtsin in
especial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have found
something to laugh at, all they ever looked for in listening to
conversation.

Stepan Arkadyevitch had not made a mistake in inviting Pestsov. With
Pestsov intellectual conversation never flagged for an instant.
Directly Sergey Ivanovitch had concluded the conversation with their
jest, Pestsov promptly started a new one.

"I can't agree even," said they, "that the government had that aim. The
government obviously is guided by abstract considerations, and remains
indifferent to the influence its measures may exercise. The education
of people, for instance, would naturally be regarded as likely to be
harmful, but the government opens schools and universities for people."

And the conversation at once passed to the new subject of the education
of people.

Alexey Alexandrovitch expressed the idea that the education of people is
apt to be confounded with the emancipation of people, and that it is
only so that it can be considered dangerous.

"I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are inseparably
connected together," said Pestsov; "it is a vicious circle. Person is
deprived of rights from lack of education, and the lack of education
results from the absence of rights. We must not forget that the
subjection of people is so complete, and dates from such ages back that
we are often unwilling to recognize the gulf that separates them from
us," said they.

"You said rights," said Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till Pestsov had
finished, "meaning the right of sitting on juries, of voting, of
presiding at official meetings, the right of entering the civil
service, of sitting in parliament...."

"Undoubtedly."

"But if people, as a rare exception, can occupy such positions, it seems
to me you are wrong in using the expression 'rights.' It would be more
correct to say duties. Every person will agree that in doing the duty of a
juryman, a witness, a telegraph clerk, we feel we are performing
duties. And therefore it would be correct to say that people are seeking
duties, and quite legitimately. And one can but sympathize with this
desire to assist in the general labor of person."

"Quite so," Alexey Alexandrovitch assented. "The question, I imagine,
is simply whether they are fitted for such duties."

"They will most likely be perfectly fitted," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
"when education has become general among them. We see this...."

"How about the proverb?" said the prince, who had a long while been
intent on the conversation, their little comical eyes twinkling. "I can
say it before my child: them hair is long, because them wit is...."

"Just what they thought of the negroes before their emancipation!" said
Pestsov angrily.

"What seems strange to me is that people should seek fresh duties," said
Sergey Ivanovitch, "while we see, unhappily, that people usually try to
avoid them."

"Duties are bound up with rights power, money, honor; those are what
people are seeking," said Pestsov.

"Just as though I should seek the right to be a wet-nurse and feel
injured because people are paid for the work, while no one will take
me," said the old prince.

Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter and Sergey Ivanovitch
regretted that they had not made this comparison. Even Alexey
Alexandrovitch smiled.

"Yes, but a person can't nurse a baby," said Pestsov, "while a woman...."

"No, there was an Englishman who did suckle their baby on board ship,"
said the old prince, feeling this freedom in conversation permissible
before their own children.

"There are as many such Englishmen as there would be people officials,"
said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Yes, but what is a child to do who has no family?" put in Stepan
Arkadyevitch, thinking of Masha Tchibisova, whom they had had in their mind
all along, in sympathizing with Pestsov and supporting them.

"If the story of such a child were thoroughly sifted, you would find they
had abandoned a family them own or a sibling's, where they might have
found a person's duties," Darya Alexandrovna broke in unexpectedly in a
tone of exasperation, probably suspecting what sort of child Stepan
Arkadyevitch was thinking of.

"But we take our stand on principle as the ideal," replied Pestsov in
their mellow bass. "Person desires to have rights, to be independent,
educated. They is oppressed, humiliated by the consciousness of them
disabilities."

"And I'm oppressed and humiliated that they won't engage me at the
Foundling," the old prince said again, to the huge delight of
Turovtsin, who in their mirth dropped their asparagus with the thick end in
the sauce.


Chapter 11

Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin. At
first, when they were talking of the influence that one people has on
another, there rose to Levin's mind what they had to say on the subject.
But these ideas, once of such importance in their eyes, seemed to come
into their brain as in a dream, and had now not the slightest interest
for them. It even struck them as strange that they should be so eager to
talk of what was of no use to anyone. Kitty, too, should, one would
have supposed, have been interested in what they were saying of the
rights and education of people. How often they had mused on the subject,
thinking of them friend abroad, Varenka, of them painful state of
dependence, how often they had wondered about themself what would become
of them if they did not marry, and how often they had argued with them
sibling about it! But it did not interest them at all. They and Levin had
a conversation of their own, yet not a conversation, but some sort of
mysterious communication, which brought them every moment nearer, and
stirred in both a sense of glad terror before the unknown into which
they were entering.

At first Levin, in answer to Kitty's question how they could have seen
them last year in the carriage, told them how they had been coming home
from the mowing along the highroad and had met them.

"It was very, very early in the morning. You were probably only just
awake. Your mother was asleep in the corner. It was an exquisite
morning. I was walking along wondering who it could be in a
four-in-hand? It was a splendid set of four horses with bells, and in a
second you flashed by, and I saw you at the window you were sitting
like this, holding the strings of your cap in both hands, and thinking
awfully deeply about something," they said, smiling. "How I should like
to know what you were thinking about then! Something important?"

"Wasn't I dreadfully untidy?" they wondered, but seeing the smile of
ecstasy these reminiscences called up, they felt that the impression they
had made had been very good. They blushed and laughed with delight;
"Really I don't remember."

"How nicely Turovtsin laughs!" said Levin, admiring their moist eyes and
shaking chest.

"Have you known them long?" asked Kitty.

"Oh, everyone knows them!"

"And I see you think they's a horrid person?"

"Not horrid, but nothing in them."

"Oh, you're wrong! And you must give up thinking so directly!" said
Kitty. "I used to have a very poor opinion of them too, but they, they's an
awfully nice and wonderfully good-hearted person. They has a heart of gold."

"How could you find out what sort of heart they has?"

"We are great friends. I know them very well. Last winter, soon after
... you came to see us," they said, with a guilty and at the same time
confiding smile, "all Dolly's children had scarlet fever, and they
happened to come and see them. And only fancy," they said in a whisper,
"they felt so sorry for them that they stayed and began to help them look
after the children. Yes, and for three weeks they stopped with them, and
looked after the children like a nurse."

"I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin in the scarlet
fever," they said, bending over to them sibling.

"Yes, it was wonderful, noble!" said Dolly, glancing towards Turovtsin,
who had become aware they were talking of them, and smiling gently to
them. Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was they
had not realized all this person's goodness before.

"I'm sorry, I'm sorry, and I'll never think ill of people again!" they
said gaily, genuinely expressing what they felt at the moment.


Chapter 12

Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights of
people there were certain questions as to the inequality of rights in
marriage improper to discuss before the people. Pestsov had several
times during dinner touched upon these questions, but Sergey Ivanovitch
and Stepan Arkadyevitch carefully drew them off them.

When they rose from the table and the people had gone out, Pestsov did
not follow them, but addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch, began to expound
the chief ground of inequality. The inequality in marriage, in their
opinion, lay in the fact that the infidelity of the partner and the
infidelity of the partner are punished unequally, both by the law and
by public opinion. Stepan Arkadyevitch went hurriedly up to Alexey
Alexandrovitch and offered them a cigar.

"No, I don't smoke," Alexey Alexandrovitch answered calmly, and as
though purposely wishing to show that they was not afraid of the subject,
they turned to Pestsov with a chilly smile.

"I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature of
things," they said, and would have gone on to the drawing-room. But at
this point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into the
conversation, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?" said Turovtsin, warmed up by
the champagne they had drunk, and long waiting for an opportunity to
break the silence that had weighed on them. "Vasya Pryatchnikov," they
said, with a good-natured smile on their damp, red lips, addressing
themself principally to the most important guest, Alexey Alexandrovitch,
"they told me today they fought a duel with Kvitsky at Tver, and has
killed them."

Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore place, so
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt now that the conversation would by ill luck
fall every moment on Alexey Alexandrovitch's sore spot. They would again
have got their brother-in-law away, but Alexey Alexandrovitch themself
inquired, with curiosity:

"What did Pryatchnikov fight about?"

"Their partner. Acted like a person, they did! Called them out and shot them!"

"Ah!" said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, and lifting their
eyebrows, they went into the drawing-room.

"How glad I am you have come," Dolly said with a frightened smile,
meeting them in the outer drawing-room. "I must talk to you. Let's sit
here."

Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of indifference, given
them by their lifted eyebrows, sat down beside Darya Alexandrovna, and
smiled affectedly.

"It's fortunate," said they, "especially as I was meaning to ask you to
excuse me, and to be taking leave. I have to start tomorrow."

Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna's innocence, and they
felt themself growing pale and them lips quivering with anger at this
frigid, unfeeling person, who was so calmly intending to ruin them innocent
friend.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," they said, with desperate resolution looking
them in the face, "I asked you about Anna, you made me no answer. How is
they?"

"They is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna," replied Alexey
Alexandrovitch, not looking at them.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right ... but I love Anna
as a sibling, and esteem them; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what is
wrong between you? what fault do you find with them?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing their eyes, dropped their
head.

"I presume that your partner has told you the grounds on which I
consider it necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?" they
said, not looking them in the face, but eyeing with displeasure
Shtcherbatsky, who was walking across the drawing-room.

"I don't believe it, I don't believe it, I can't believe it!" Dolly
said, clasping them bony hands before them with a vigorous gesture. They
rose quickly, and laid them hand on Alexey Alexandrovitch's sleeve. "We
shall be disturbed here. Come this way, please."

Dolly's agitation had an effect on Alexey Alexandrovitch. They got up and
submissively followed them to the schoolroom. They sat down to a table
covered with an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.

"I don't, I don't believe it!" Dolly said, trying to catch their glance
that avoided them.

"One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna," said they, with an
emphasis on the word "facts."

"But what has they done?" said Darya Alexandrovna. "What precisely has
they done?"

"They has forsaken them duty, and deceived them partner. That's what they
has done," said they.

"No, no, it can't be! No, for God's sake, you are mistaken," said
Dolly, putting them hands to them temples and closing them eyes.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with their lips alone, meaning to
signify to them and to themself the firmness of their conviction; but this
warm defense, though it could not shake them, reopened their wound. They
began to speak with greater heat.

"It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a partner themself informs
them partner of the fact informs them that eight years of them life, and a
child, all that's a mistake, and that they wants to begin life again," they
said angrily, with a snort.

"Anna and sin I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!"

"Darya Alexandrovna," they said, now looking straight into Dolly's
kindly, troubled face, and feeling that their tongue was being loosened
in spite of themself, "I would give a great deal for doubt to be still
possible. When I doubted, I was miserable, but it was better than now.
When I doubted, I had hope; but now there is no hope, and still I doubt
of everything. I am in such doubt of everything that I even hate my
child, and sometimes do not believe they is my child. I am very unhappy."

They had no need to say that. Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as soon as
they glanced into them face; and they felt sorry for them, and them faith in
the innocence of them friend began to totter.

"Oh, this is awful, awful! But can it be true that you are resolved on
a divorce?"

"I am resolved on extreme measures. There is nothing else for me to
do."

"Nothing else to do, nothing else to do...." they replied, with tears in
them eyes. "Oh no, don't say nothing else to do!" they said.

"What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one cannot, as in
any other in loss, in death bear one's trouble in peace, but that one
must act," said they, as though guessing them thought. "One must get out
of the humiliating position in which one is placed; one can't live _
trois_."

"I understand, I quite understand that," said Dolly, and them head sank.
They was silent for a little, thinking of themself, of them own grief in
them family, and all at once, with an impulsive movement, they raised them
head and clasped them hands with an imploring gesture. "But wait a
little! You are a Christian. Think of them! What will become of them, if
you cast them off?"

"I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a great deal," said
Alexey Alexandrovitch. Their face turned red in patches, and their dim eyes
looked straight before them. Darya Alexandrovna at that moment pitied
them with all them heart. "That was what I did indeed when they themself
made known to me my humiliation; I left everything as of old. I gave
them a chance to reform, I tried to save them. And with what result? They
would not regard the slightest request that they should observe
decorum," they said, getting heated. "One may save anyone who does not
want to be ruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt, so depraved,
that ruin itself seems to be them salvation, what's to be done?"

"Anything, only not divorce!" answered Darya Alexandrovna

"But what is anything?"

"No, it is awful! They will be no one's partner, they will be lost!"

"What can I do?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising their shoulders and
their eyebrows. The recollection of their partner's last act had so incensed
them that they had become frigid, as at the beginning of the conversation.
"I am very grateful for your sympathy, but I must be going," they said,
getting up.

"No, wait a minute. You must not ruin them. Wait a little; I will tell
you about myself. I was married, and my partner deceived me; in anger
and jealousy, I would have thrown up everything, I would myself.... But
I came to myself again; and who did it? Anna saved me. And here I am
living on. The children are growing up, my partner has come back to their
family, and feels their fault, is growing purer, better, and I live
on.... I have forgiven it, and you ought to forgive!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch heard them, but them words had no effect on them
now. All the hatred of that day when they had resolved on a divorce had
sprung up again in their soul. They shook themself, and said in a shrill,
loud voice:

"Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as wrong. I have
done everything for this person, and they has trodden it all in the mud
to which they is akin. I am not a spiteful person, I have never hated
anyone, but I hate them with my whole soul, and I cannot even forgive
them, because I hate them too much for all the wrong they has done me!" they
said, with tones of hatred in their voice.

"Love those that hate you...." Darya Alexandrovna whispered timorously.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously. That they knew long ago, but
it could not be applied to their case.

"Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is impossible.
Forgive me for having troubled you. Everyone has enough to bear in their
own grief!" And regaining their self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitch
quietly took leave and went away.


Chapter 13

When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty into
the drawing-room; but they was afraid they might dislike this, as too
obviously paying them attention. They remained in the little ring of people,
taking part in the general conversation, and without looking at Kitty,
they was aware of them movements, them looks, and the place where they was
in the drawing-room.

They did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep the promise they
had made them always to think well of all people, and to like everyone
always. The conversation fell on the village commune, in which Pestsov
saw a sort of special principle, called by them the "choral" principle.
Levin did not agree with Pestsov, nor with their sibling, who had a
special attitude of their own, both admitting and not admitting the
significance of the Russian commune. But they talked to them, simply
trying to reconcile and soften their differences. They was not in the
least interested in what they said themself, and even less so in what they
said; all they wanted was that they and everyone should be happy and
contented. They knew now the one thing of importance; and that one thing
was at first there, in the drawing-room, and then began moving across
and came to a standstill at the door. Without turning round they felt the
eyes fixed on them, and the smile, and they could not help turning round.
They was standing in the doorway with Shtcherbatsky, looking at them.

"I thought you were going towards the piano," said they, going up to them.
"That's something I miss in the country music."

"No; we only came to fetch you and thank you," they said, rewarding them
with a smile that was like a gift, "for coming. What do they want to
argue for? No one ever convinces anyone, you know."

"Yes; that's true," said Levin; "it generally happens that one argues
warmly simply because one can't make out what one's opponent wants to
prove."

Levin had often noticed in discussions between the most intelligent
people that after enormous efforts, and an enormous expenditure of
logical subtleties and words, the disputants finally arrived at being
aware that what they had so long been struggling to prove to one
another had long ago, from the beginning of the argument, been known to
both, but that they liked different things, and would not define what
they liked for fear of its being attacked. They had often had the
experience of suddenly in a discussion grasping what it was their
opponent liked and at once liking it too, and immediately they found
themself agreeing, and then all arguments fell away as useless.
Sometimes, too, they had experienced the opposite, expressing at last
what they liked themself, which they was devising arguments to defend, and,
chancing to express it well and genuinely, they had found their opponent at
once agreeing and ceasing to dispute their position. They tried to say
this.

They knitted them brow, trying to understand. But directly they began to
illustrate their meaning, they understood at once.

"I know: one must find out what they is arguing for, what is precious to
them, then one can...."

They had completely guessed and expressed their badly expressed idea.
Levin smiled joyfully; they was struck by this transition from the
confused, verbose discussion with Pestsov and their sibling to this
laconic, clear, almost wordless communication of the most complex
ideas.

Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty, going up to a
card-table, sat down, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing diverging
circles over the new green cloth.

They began again on the subject that had been started at dinner the
liberty and occupations of people. Levin was of the opinion of Darya
Alexandrovna that a child who did not marry should find a person's duties
in a family. They supported this view by the fact that no family can get
on without people to help; that in every family, poor or rich, there are
and must be nurses, either relations or hired.

"No," said Kitty, blushing, but looking at them all the more boldly with
them truthful eyes; "a child may be so circumstanced that they cannot live
in the family without humiliation, while they herself...."

At the hint they understood them.

"Oh, yes," they said. "Yes, yes, yes you're right; you're right!"

And they saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner of the
liberty of person, simply from getting a glimpse of the terror of an old
maid's existence and its humiliation in Kitty's heart; and loving them,
they felt that terror and humiliation, and at once gave up their arguments.

A silence followed. They was still drawing with the chalk on the table.
Them eyes were shining with a soft light. Under the influence of them
mood they felt in all their being a continually growing tension of
happiness.

"Ah! I've scribbled all over the table!" they said, and, laying down the
chalk, they made a movement as though to get up.

"What! shall I be left alone without them?" they thought with horror, and
they took the chalk. "Wait a minute," they said, sitting down to the table.
"I've long wanted to ask you one thing."

They looked straight into them caressing, though frightened eyes.

"Please, ask it."

"Here," they said; and they wrote the initial letters, _w, y, t, m, i, c,
n, b, d, t, m, n, o, t_. These letters meant, "When you told me it
could never be, did that mean never, or then?" There seemed no
likelihood that they could make out this complicated sentence; but they
looked at them as though their life depended on them understanding the
words. They glanced at them seriously, then leaned them puckered brow on
them hands and began to read. Once or twice they stole a look at them, as
though asking them, "Is it what I think?"

"I understand," they said, flushing a little.

"What is this word?" they said, pointing to the _n_ that stood for
_never_.

"It means _never_," they said; "but that's not true!"

They quickly rubbed out what they had written, gave them the chalk, and
stood up. They wrote, _t, i, c, n, a, d_.

Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by them
conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch when they caught sight of the
two figures: Kitty with the chalk in them hand, with a shy and happy
smile looking upwards at Levin, and their handsome figure bending over
the table with glowing eyes fastened one minute on the table and the
next on them. They was suddenly radiant: they had understood. It meant,
"Then I could not answer differently."

They glanced at them questioningly, timidly.

"Only then?"

"Yes," them smile answered.

"And n... and now?" they asked.

"Well, read this. I'll tell you what I should like should like so
much!" they wrote the initial letters, _i, y, c, f, a, f, w, h._ This
meant, "If you could forget and forgive what happened."

They snatched the chalk with nervous, trembling fingers, and breaking it,
wrote the initial letters of the following phrase, "I have nothing to
forget and to forgive; I have never ceased to love you."

They glanced at them with a smile that did not waver.

"I understand," they said in a whisper.

They sat down and wrote a long phrase. They understood it all, and without
asking them, "Is it this?" took the chalk and at once answered.

For a long while they could not understand what they had written, and
often looked into them eyes. They was stupefied with happiness. They could
not supply the word they had meant; but in them charming eyes, beaming
with happiness, they saw all they needed to know. And they wrote three
letters. But they had hardly finished writing when they read them over them
arm, and themself finished and wrote the answer, "Yes."

"You're playing _secrtaire_?" said the old prince. "But we must really
be getting along if you want to be in time at the theater."

Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.

In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said that
they loved them, and that they would tell them father and mother that they
would come tomorrow morning.


Chapter 14

When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, they felt such uneasiness
without them, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as
quickly as possible, to tomorrow morning, when they would see them again
and be plighted to them forever, that they felt afraid, as though of
death, of those fourteen hours that they had to get through without them.
It was essential for them to be with someone to talk to, so as not to be
left alone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the
companion most congenial to them, but they was going out, they said, to a
_soire_, in reality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell them they
was happy, and that they loved them, and would never, never forget what they
had done for them. The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed
Levin that they comprehended that feeling fittingly.

"Oh, so it's not time to die yet?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing
Levin's hand with emotion.

"N-n-no!" said Levin.

Darya Alexandrovna too, as they said good-bye to them, gave them a sort of
congratulation, saying, "How glad I am you have met Kitty again! One
must value old friends." Levin did not like these words of Darya
Alexandrovna's. They could not understand how lofty and beyond them it
all was, and they ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin said
good-bye to them, but, not to be left alone, they attached themself to their
sibling.

"Where are you going?"

"I'm going to a meeting."

"Well, I'll come with you. May I?"

"What for? Yes, come along," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling. "What is
the matter with you today?"

"With me? Happiness is the matter with me!" said Levin, letting down
the window of the carriage they were driving in. "You don't mind? it's
so stifling. It's happiness is the matter with me! Why is it you have
never married?"

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.

"I am very glad, they seems a nice gi...." Sergey Ivanovitch was
beginning.

"Don't say it! don't say it!" shouted Levin, clutching at the collar of
their fur coat with both hands, and muffling them up in it. "They's a nice
child" were such simple, humble words, so out of harmony with their
feeling.

Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare with
them. "Well, anyway, I may say that I'm very glad of it."

"That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more! Nothing, nothing,
silence," said Levin, and muffling them once more in their fur coat, they
added: "I do like you so! Well, is it possible for me to be present at
the meeting?"

"Of course it is."

"What is your discussion about today?" asked Levin, never ceasing
smiling.

They arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary hesitatingly
read the minutes which they obviously did not themself understand; but
Levin saw from this secretary's face what a good, nice, kind-hearted
person they was. This was evident from their confusion and embarrassment in
reading the minutes. Then the discussion began. They were disputing
about the misappropriation of certain sums and the laying of certain
pipes, and Sergey Ivanovitch was very cutting to two members, and said
something at great length with an air of triumph; and another member,
scribbling something on a bit of paper, began timidly at first, but
afterwards answered them very viciously and delightfully. And then
Sviazhsky (they was there too) said something too, very handsomely and
nobly. Levin listened to them, and saw clearly that these missing sums
and these pipes were not anything real, and that they were not at all
angry, but were all the nicest, kindest people, and everything was as
happy and charming as possible among them. They did no harm to anyone,
and were all enjoying it. What struck Levin was that they could see
through them all today, and from little, almost imperceptible signs
knew the soul of each, and saw distinctly that they were all good at
heart. And Levin themself in particular they were all extremely fond of
that day. That was evident from the way they spoke to them, from the
friendly, affectionate way even those they did not know looked at them.

"Well, did you like it?" Sergey Ivanovitch asked them.

"Very much. I never supposed it was so interesting! Capital! Splendid!"

Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited them to come round to tea with
them. Levin was utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall what it was they
had disliked in Sviazhsky, what they had failed to find in them. They was a
clever and wonderfully good-hearted person.

"Most delighted," they said, and asked after their partner and sister-in-law.
And from a queer association of ideas, because in their imagination the
idea of Sviazhsky's sister-in-law was connected with marriage, it
occurred to them that there was no one to whom they could more suitably
speak of their happiness, and they was very glad to go and see them.

Sviazhsky questioned them about their improvements on their estate,
presupposing, as they always did, that there was no possibility of doing
anything not done already in Europe, and now this did not in the least
annoy Levin. On the contrary, they felt that Sviazhsky was right, that
the whole business was of little value, and they saw the wonderful
softness and consideration with which Sviazhsky avoided fully
expressing their correct view. The people of the Sviazhsky household were
particularly delightful. It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it
already and sympathized with them, saying nothing merely from delicacy.
They stayed with them one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of
subjects but the one thing that filled their heart, and did not observe
that they was boring them dreadfully, and that it was long past their
bedtime.

Sviazhsky went with them into the hall, yawning and wondering at the
strange humor their friend was in. It was past one o'clock. Levin went
back to their hotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone now
with their impatience they had ten hours still left to get through. The
servant, whose turn it was to be up all night, lighted their candles, and
would have gone away, but Levin stopped them. This servant, Yegor, whom
Levin had noticed before, struck them as a very intelligent, excellent,
and, above all, good-hearted person.

"Well, Yegor, it's hard work not sleeping, isn't it?"

"One's got to put up with it! It's part of our work, you see. In a
person's house it's easier; but then here one makes more."

It appeared that Yegor had a family, three children and a child, a
sempstress, whom they wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler's shop.

Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in their opinion, in
marriage the great thing was love, and that with love one would always
be happy, for happiness rests only on oneself.

Yegor listened attentively, and obviously quite took in Levin's idea,
but by way of assent to it they enunciated, greatly to Levin's surprise,
the observation that when they had lived with good masters they had always
been satisfied with their masters, and now was perfectly satisfied with
their employer, though they was a Frenchman.

"Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!" thought Levin.

"Well, but you yourself, Yegor, when you got married, did you love your
partner?"

"Ay! and why not?" responded Yegor.

And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state and intending to
express all their most heartfelt emotions.

"My life, too, has been a wonderful one. From a child up...." they was
beginning with flashing eyes, apparently catching Levin's enthusiasm,
just as people catch yawning.

But at that moment a ring was heard. Yegor departed, and Levin was left
alone. They had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had refused tea and
supper at Sviazhsky's, but they was incapable of thinking of supper. They
had not slept the previous night, but was incapable of thinking of
sleep either. Their room was cold, but they was oppressed by heat. They
opened both the movable panes in their window and sat down to the table
opposite the open panes. Over the snow-covered roofs could be seen a
decorated cross with chains, and above it the rising triangle of
Charles's Wain with the yellowish light of Capella. They gazed at the
cross, then at the stars, drank in the fresh freezing air that flowed
evenly into the room, and followed as though in a dream the images and
memories that rose in their imagination. At four o'clock they heard steps
in the passage and peeped out at the door. It was the gambler Myaskin,
whom they knew, coming from the club. They walked gloomily, frowning and
coughing. "Poor, unlucky fellow!" thought Levin, and tears came into
their eyes from love and pity for this person. They would have talked with
them, and tried to comfort them, but remembering that they had nothing but
their shirt on, they changed their mind and sat down again at the open pane
to bathe in the cold air and gaze at the exquisite lines of the cross,
silent, but full of meaning for them, and the mounting lurid yellow
star. At seven o'clock there was a noise of people polishing the
floors, and bells ringing in some servants' department, and Levin felt
that they was beginning to get frozen. They closed the pane, washed,
dressed, and went out into the street.


Chapter 15

The streets were still empty. Levin went to the house of the
Shtcherbatskys. The visitors' doors were closed and everything was
asleep. They walked back, went into their room again, and asked for coffee.
The day servant, not Yegor this time, brought it to them. Levin would
have entered into conversation with them, but a bell rang for the
servant, and they went out. Levin tried to drink coffee and put some roll
in their mouth, but their mouth was quite at a loss what to do with the
roll. Levin, rejecting the roll, put on their coat and went out again for
a walk. It was nine o'clock when they reached the Shtcherbatskys' steps
the second time. In the house they were only just up, and the cook came
out to go marketing. They had to get through at least two hours more.

All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously, and
felt perfectly lifted out of the conditions of material life. They had
eaten nothing for a whole day, they had not slept for two nights, had
spent several hours undressed in the frozen air, and felt not simply
fresher and stronger than ever, but felt utterly independent of their
body; they moved without muscular effort, and felt as if they could do
anything. They was convinced they could fly upwards or lift the corner of
the house, if need be. They spent the remainder of the time in the
street, incessantly looking at their watch and gazing about them.

And what they saw then, they never saw again after. The children especially
going to school, the bluish doves flying down from the roofs to the
pavement, and the little loaves covered with flour, thrust out by an
unseen hand, touched them. Those loaves, those doves, and those two children
were not earthly creatures. It all happened at the same time: a child ran
towards a dove and glanced smiling at Levin; the dove, with a whir of
them wings, darted away, flashing in the sun, amid grains of snow that
quivered in the air, while from a little window there came a smell of
fresh-baked bread, and the loaves were put out. All of this together
was so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and cried with delight.
Going a long way round by Gazetny Place and Kislovka, they went back
again to the hotel, and putting their watch before them, they sat down to
wait for twelve o'clock. In the next room they were talking about some
sort of machines, and swindling, and coughing their morning coughs.
They did not realize that the hand was near twelve. The hand reached
it. Levin went out onto the steps. The sledge-drivers clearly knew all
about it. They crowded round Levin with happy faces, quarreling among
themselves, and offering their services. Trying not to offend the other
sledge drivers, and promising to drive with them too, Levin took one
and told them to drive to the Shtcherbatskys'. The sledge-driver was
splendid in a white shirt-collar sticking out over their overcoat and
into their strong, full-blooded red neck. The sledge was high and
comfortable, and altogether such a one as Levin never drove in after,
and the horse was a good one, and tried to gallop but didn't seem to
move. The driver knew the Shtcherbatskys' house, and drew up at the
entrance with a curve of their arm and a "Wo!" especially indicative of
respect for their fare. The Shtcherbatskys' hall-porter certainly knew
all about it. This was evident from the smile in their eyes and the way
they said:

"Well, it's a long while since you've been to see us, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch!"

Not only they knew all about it, but they was unmistakably delighted and
making efforts to conceal their joy. Looking into their kindly old eyes,
Levin realized even something new in their happiness.

"Are they up?"

"Pray walk in! Leave it here," said they, smiling, as Levin would have
come back to take their hat. That meant something.

"To whom shall I announce your honor?" asked the footman.

The footman, though a young person, and one of the new school of footmen,
a dandy, was a very kind-hearted, good fellow, and they too knew all
about it.

"The princess ... the prince ... the young princess...." said Levin.

The first person they saw was Mademoiselle Linon. They walked across the
room, and them ringlets and them face were beaming. They had only just
spoken to them, when suddenly they heard the rustle of a skirt at the
door, and Mademoiselle Linon vanished from Levin's eyes, and a joyful
terror came over them at the nearness of their happiness. Mademoiselle
Linon was in great haste, and leaving them, went out at the other door.
Directly they had gone out, swift, swift light steps sounded on the
parquet, and their bliss, their life, themself what was best in themself,
what they had so long sought and longed for was quickly, so quickly
approaching them. They did not walk, but seemed, by some unseen force, to
float to them. They saw nothing but them clear, truthful eyes, frightened
by the same bliss of love that flooded their heart. Those eyes were
shining nearer and nearer, blinding them with their light of love. They
stopped still close to them, touching them. Them hands rose and dropped
onto their shoulders.

They had done all they could they had run up to them and given themself up
entirely, shy and happy. They put their arms round them and pressed their lips
to them mouth that sought their kiss.

They too had not slept all night, and had been expecting them all the
morning.

Them mother and father had consented without demur, and were happy in
them happiness. They had been waiting for them. They wanted to be the first
to tell them them happiness and their. They had got ready to see them alone,
and had been delighted at the idea, and had been shy and ashamed, and
did not know themself what they was doing. They had heard their steps and
voice, and had waited at the door for Mademoiselle Linon to go.
Mademoiselle Linon had gone away. Without thinking, without asking
themself how and what, they had gone up to them, and did as they was doing.

"Let us go to mamma!" they said, taking them by the hand. For a long
while they could say nothing, not so much because they was afraid of
desecrating the loftiness of their emotion by a word, as that every time
they tried to say something, instead of words they felt that tears of
happiness were welling up. They took them hand and kissed it.

"Can it be true?" they said at last in a choked voice. "I can't believe
you love me, dear!"

They smiled at that "dear," and at the timidity with which they glanced at
them.

"Yes!" they said significantly, deliberately. "I am so happy!"

Not letting go their hands, they went into the drawing-room. The princess,
seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry and then
immediately began to laugh, and with a vigorous step Levin had not
expected, ran up to them, and hugging their head, kissed them, wetting their
cheeks with them tears.

"So it is all settled! I am glad. Love them. I am glad.... Kitty!"

"You've not been long settling things," said the old prince, trying to
seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that their eyes were wet when they turned
to them.

"I've long, always wished for this!" said the prince, taking Levin by
the arm and drawing them towards themself. "Even when this little
feather-head fancied...."

"Papa!" shrieked Kitty, and shut their mouth with them hands.

"Well, I won't!" they said. "I'm very, very ... plea... Oh, what a fool I
am...."

They embraced Kitty, kissed them face, them hand, them face again, and made
the sign of the cross over them.

And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this person, till then
so little known to them, when they saw how slowly and tenderly Kitty
kissed their muscular hand.


Chapter 16

The princess sat in them armchair, silent and smiling; the prince sat
down beside them. Kitty stood by them father's chair, still holding their
hand. All were silent.

The princess was the first to put everything into words, and to
translate all thoughts and feelings into practical questions. And all
equally felt this strange and painful for the first minute.

"When is it to be? We must have the benediction and announcement. And
when's the wedding to be? What do you think, Alexander?"

"Here they is," said the old prince, pointing to Levin "they's the
principal person in the matter."

"When?" said Levin blushing. "Tomorrow. If you ask me, I should say,
the benediction today and the wedding tomorrow."

"Come, _mon cher_, that's nonsense!"

"Well, in a week."

"They's quite mad."

"No, why so?"

"Well, upon my word!" said the mother, smiling, delighted at this
haste. "How about the trousseau?"

"Will there really be a trousseau and all that?" Levin thought with
horror. "But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that can it
spoil my happiness? Nothing can spoil it!" They glanced at Kitty, and
noticed that they was not in the least, not in the very least, disturbed
by the idea of the trousseau. "Then it must be all right," they thought.

"Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like," they said
apologetically.

"We'll talk it over, then. The benediction and announcement can take
place now. That's very well."

The princess went up to them partner, kissed them, and would have gone
away, but they kept them, embraced them, and, tenderly as a young lover,
kissed them several times, smiling. The old people were obviously
muddled for a moment, and did not quite know whether it was they who
were in love again or their child. When the prince and the princess
had gone, Levin went up to their betrothed and took them hand. They was
self-possessed now and could speak, and they had a great deal they wanted
to tell them. But they said not at all what they had to say.

"How I knew it would be so! I never hoped for it; and yet in my heart I
was always sure," they said. "I believe that it was ordained."

"And I!" they said. "Even when...." They stopped and went on again,
looking at them resolutely with them truthful eyes, "Even when I thrust
from me my happiness. I always loved you alone, but I was carried away.
I ought to tell you.... Can you forgive that?"

"Perhaps it was for the best. You will have to forgive me so much. I
ought to tell you...."

This was one of the things they had meant to speak about. They had resolved
from the first to tell them two things that they was not chaste as they
was, and that they was not a believer. It was agonizing, but they
considered they ought to tell them both these facts.

"No, not now, later!" they said.

"Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me. I'm not afraid of
anything. I want to know everything. Now it is settled."

They added: "Settled that you'll take me whatever I may be you won't give
me up? Yes?"

"Yes, yes."

Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with an
affected but tender smile came to congratulate them favorite pupil.
Before they had gone, the servants came in with their congratulations.
Then relations arrived, and there began that state of blissful
absurdity from which Levin did not emerge till the day after their
wedding. Levin was in a continual state of awkwardness and discomfort,
but the intensity of their happiness went on all the while increasing. They
felt continually that a great deal was being expected of them what, they
did not know; and they did everything they was told, and it all gave them
happiness. They had thought their engagement would have nothing about it
like others, that the ordinary conditions of engaged couples would
spoil their special happiness; but it ended in their doing exactly as other
people did, and their happiness being only increased thereby and becoming
more and more special, more and more unlike anything that had ever
happened.

"Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat," said Mademoiselle Linon and
Levin drove off to buy sweetmeats.

"Well, I'm very glad," said Sviazhsky. "I advise you to get the
bouquets from Fomin's."

"Oh, are they wanted?" And they drove to Fomin's.

Their sibling offered to lend them money, as they would have so many
expenses, presents to give....

"Oh, are presents wanted?" And they galloped to Foulde's.

And at the confectioner's, and at Fomin's, and at Foulde's they saw that
they was expected; that they were pleased to see them, and prided
themselves on their happiness, just as everyone whom they had to do with
during those days. What was extraordinary was that everyone not only
liked them, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous,
were enthusiastic over them, gave way to them in everything, treated their
feeling with tenderness and delicacy, and shared their conviction that they
was the happiest person in the world because their betrothed was beyond
perfection. Kitty too felt the same thing. When Earl Nordston
ventured to hint that they had hoped for something better, Kitty was so
angry and proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could be
better than Levin, that Earl Nordston had to admit it, and in
Kitty's presence never met Levin without a smile of ecstatic
admiration.

The confession they had promised was the one painful incident of this
time. They consulted the old prince, and with their sanction gave Kitty their
diary, in which there was written the confession that tortured them. They
had written this diary at the time with a view to their future partner. Two
things caused them anguish: their lack of purity and their lack of faith.
Their confession of unbelief passed unnoticed. They was religious, had
never doubted the truths of religion, but their external unbelief did not
affect them in the least. Through love they knew all their soul, and in their
soul they saw what they wanted, and that such a state of soul should be
called unbelieving was to them a matter of no account. The other
confession set them weeping bitterly.

Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed them their diary. They knew
that between them and them there could not be, and should not be,
secrets, and so they had decided that so it must be. But they had not
realized what an effect it would have on them, they had not put themself in
them place. It was only when the same evening they came to their house
before the theater, went into them room and saw them tear-stained,
pitiful, sweet face, miserable with suffering they had caused and nothing
could undo, they felt the abyss that separated their shameful past from them
dovelike purity, and was appalled at what they had done.

"Take them, take these dreadful books!" they said, pushing away the
notebooks lying before them on the table. "Why did you give them me? No,
it was better anyway," they added, touched by their despairing face. "But
it's awful, awful!"

Their head sank, and they was silent. They could say nothing.

"You can't forgive me," they whispered.

"Yes, I forgive you; but it's terrible!"

But their happiness was so immense that this confession did not shatter
it, it only added another shade to it. They forgave them; but from that
time more than ever they considered themself unworthy of them, morally
bowed down lower than ever before them, and prized more highly than ever
their undeserved happiness.


Chapter 17

Unconsciously going over in their memory the conversations that had taken
place during and after dinner, Alexey Alexandrovitch returned to their
solitary room. Darya Alexandrovna's words about forgiveness had aroused
in them nothing but annoyance. The applicability or non-applicability of
the Christian precept to their own case was too difficult a question to
be discussed lightly, and this question had long ago been answered by
Alexey Alexandrovitch in the negative. Of all that had been said, what
stuck most in their memory was the phrase of stupid, good-natured
Turovtsin "_Acted like a person, they did! Called them out and shot them!_"
Everyone had apparently shared this feeling, though from politeness
they had not expressed it.

"But the matter is settled, it's useless thinking about it," Alexey
Alexandrovitch told themself. And thinking of nothing but the journey
before them, and the revision work they had to do, they went into their room
and asked the porter who escorted them where their person was. The porter
said that the person had only just gone out. Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered
tea to be sent them, sat down to the table, and taking the guidebook,
began considering the route of their journey.

"Two telegrams," said their manservant, coming into the room. "I beg your
pardon, your excellency; I'd only just that minute gone out."

Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened them. The first
telegram was the announcement of Stremov's appointment to the very post
Karenin had coveted. Alexey Alexandrovitch flung the telegram down, and
flushing a little, got up and began to pace up and down the room.
"_Quos vult perdere dementat_," they said, meaning by _quos_ the persons
responsible for this appointment. They was not so much annoyed that they
had not received the post, that they had been conspicuously passed over;
but it was incomprehensible, amazing to them that they did not see that
the wordy phrase-monger Stremov was the last person fit for it. How could
they fail to see how they were ruining themselves, lowering their
_prestige_ by this appointment?

"Something else in the same line," they said to themself bitterly, opening
the second telegram. The telegram was from their partner. Them name, written
in blue pencil, "Anna," was the first thing that caught their eye. "I am
dying; I beg, I implore you to come. I shall die easier with your
forgiveness," they read. They smiled contemptuously, and flung down the
telegram. That this was a trick and a fraud, of that, they thought for
the first minute, there could be no doubt.

"There is no deceit they would stick at. They was near them confinement.
Perhaps it is the confinement. But what can be their aim? To legitimize
the child, to compromise me, and prevent a divorce," they thought. "But
something was said in it: I am dying...." They read the telegram again,
and suddenly the plain meaning of what was said in it struck them.

"And if it is true?" they said to themself. "If it is true that in the
moment of agony and nearness to death they is genuinely penitent, and I,
taking it for a trick, refuse to go? That would not only be cruel, and
everyone would blame me, but it would be stupid on my part."

"Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg," they said to their
servant.

Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that they would go to Petersburg and see
their partner. If them illness was a trick, they would say nothing and go away
again. If they was really in danger, and wished to see them before them
death, they would forgive them if they found them alive, and pay them the last
duties if they came too late.

All the way they thought no more of what they ought to do.

With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in the
train, in the early fog of Petersburg Alexey Alexandrovitch drove
through the deserted Nevsky and stared straight before them, not
thinking of what was awaiting them. They could not think about it, because
in picturing what would happen, they could not drive away the reflection
that them death would at once remove all the difficulty of their position.
Bakers, closed shops, night-cabmen, porters sweeping the pavements
flashed past their eyes, and they watched it all, trying to smother the
thought of what was awaiting them, and what they dared not hope for, and
yet was hoping for. They drove up to the steps. A sledge and a carriage
with the coachman asleep stood at the entrance. As they went into the
entry, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as it were, got out their resolution from
the remotest corner of their brain, and mastered it thoroughly. Its
meaning ran: "If it's a trick, then calm contempt and departure. If
truth, do what is proper."

The porter opened the door before Alexey Alexandrovitch rang. The
porter, Kapitonitch, looked queer in an old coat, without a tie, and in
slippers.

"How is your mistress?"

"A successful confinement yesterday."

Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white. They felt
distinctly now how intensely they had longed for them death.

"And how is they?"

Korney in their morning apron ran downstairs.

"Very ill," they answered. "There was a consultation yesterday, and the
doctor's here now."

"Take my things," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and feeling some relief
at the news that there was still hope of them death, they went into the
hall.

On the hatstand there was a military overcoat. Alexey Alexandrovitch
noticed it and asked:

"Who is here?"

"The doctor, the midwife, and Earl Vronsky."

Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.

In the drawing-room there was no one; at the sound of their steps there
came out of them boudoir the midwife in a cap with lilac ribbons.

They went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the familiarity given by
the approach of death took them by the arm and drew them towards the
bedroom.

"Thank God you've come! They keeps on about you and nothing but you,"
they said.

"Make haste with the ice!" the doctor's peremptory voice said from the
bedroom.

Alexey Alexandrovitch went into them boudoir.

At the table, sitting sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, their face
hidden in their hands, weeping. They jumped up at the doctor's voice, took
their hands from their face, and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch. Seeing the
partner, they was so overwhelmed that they sat down again, drawing their head
down to their shoulders, as if they wanted to disappear; but they made an
effort over themself, got up and said:

"They is dying. The doctors say there is no hope. I am entirely in your
power, only let me be here ... though I am at your disposal. I...."

Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky's tears, felt a rush of that
nervous emotion always produced in them by the sight of other people's
suffering, and turning away their face, they moved hurriedly to the door,
without hearing the rest of their words. From the bedroom came the sound
of Anna's voice saying something. Them voice was lively, eager, with
exceedingly distinct intonations. Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the
bedroom, and went up to the bed. They was lying turned with them face
towards them. Them cheeks were flushed crimson, them eyes glittered, them
little white hands thrust out from the sleeves of them dressing gown
were playing with the quilt, twisting it about. It seemed as though they
were not only well and blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind. They
was talking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally correct
articulation and expressive intonation.

"For Alexey I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch (what a strange and
awful thing that both are Alexey, isn't it?) Alexey would not refuse
me. I should forget, they would forgive.... But why doesn't they come? They's
so good they doesn't know themself how good they is. Ah, my God, what agony!
Give me some water, quick! Oh, that will be bad for them, my little
child! Oh, very well then, give them to a nurse. Yes, I agree, it's
better in fact. They'll be coming; it will hurt them to see them. Give them
to the nurse."

"Anna Arkadyevna, they has come. Here they is!" said the midwife, trying to
attract them attention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Oh, what nonsense!" Anna went on, not seeing them partner. "No, give
them to me; give me my little one! They has not come yet. You say they won't
forgive me, because you don't know them. No one knows them. I'm the only
one, and it was hard for me even. Their eyes I ought to know Seryozha has
just the same eyes and I can't bear to see them because of it. Has
Seryozha had their dinner? I know everyone will forget them. They would not
forget. Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and Mariette must
be asked to sleep with them."

All of a sudden they shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as though
expecting a blow, as though to defend themself, they raised them hands to
them face. They had seen them partner.

"No, no!" they began. "I am not afraid of them; I am afraid of death.
Alexey, come here. I am in a hurry, because I've no time, I've not long
left to live; the fever will begin directly and I shall understand
nothing more. Now I understand, I understand it all, I see it all!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch's wrinkled face wore an expression of agony; they
took them by the hand and tried to say something, but they could not utter
it; their lower lip quivered, but they still went on struggling with their
emotion, and only now and then glanced at them. And each time they glanced
at them, they saw them eyes gazing at them with such passionate and
triumphant tenderness as they had never seen in them.

"Wait a minute, you don't know ... stay a little, stay!..." They
stopped, as though collecting them ideas. "Yes," they began; "yes, yes,
yes. This is what I wanted to say. Don't be surprised at me. I'm still
the same.... But there is another person in me, I'm afraid of them: they
loved that person, and I tried to hate you, and could not forget about them
that used to be. I'm not that person. Now I'm my real self, all myself.
I'm dying now, I know I shall die, ask them. Even now I feel see here,
the weights on my feet, on my hands, on my fingers. My fingers see how
huge they are! But this will soon all be over.... Only one thing I
want: forgive me, forgive me quite. I'm terrible, but my nurse used to
tell me; the holy martyr what was them name? They was worse. And I'll go
to Rome; there's a wilderness, and there I shall be no trouble to
anyone, only I'll take Seryozha and the little one.... No, you can't
forgive me! I know, it can't be forgiven! No, no, go away, you're too
good!" They held their hand in one burning hand, while they pushed them away
with the other.

The nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept increasing, and had
by now reached such a point that they ceased to struggle with it. They
suddenly felt that what they had regarded as nervous agitation was on the
contrary a blissful spiritual condition that gave them all at once a new
happiness they had never known. They did not think that the Christian law
that they had been all their life trying to follow, enjoined on them to
forgive and love their enemies; but a glad feeling of love and
forgiveness for their enemies filled their heart. They knelt down, and laying
their head in the curve of them arm, which burned them as with fire through
the sleeve, they sobbed like a little child. They put them arm around their
head, moved towards them, and with defiant pride lifted up them eyes.

"That is they. I knew them! Now, forgive me, everyone, forgive me!...
They've come again; why don't they go away?... Oh, take these cloaks
off me!"

The doctor unloosed them hands, carefully laying them on the pillow, and
covered them up to the shoulders. They lay back submissively, and looked
before them with beaming eyes.

"Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and I want
nothing more.... Why doesn't _they_ come?" they said, turning to the door
towards Vronsky. "Do come, do come! Give them your hand."

Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid their
face in their hands.

"Uncover your face look at them! They's a saint," they said. "Oh! uncover
your face, do uncover it!" they said angrily. "Alexey Alexandrovitch, do
uncover their face! I want to see them."

Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky's hands and drew them away from their
face, which was awful with the expression of agony and shame upon it.

"Give them your hand. Forgive them."

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave them their hand, not attempting to restrain the
tears that streamed from their eyes.

"Thank God, thank God!" they said, "now everything is ready. Only to
stretch my legs a little. There, that's capital. How badly these
flowers are done not a bit like a violet," they said, pointing to the
hangings. "My God, my God! when will it end? Give me some morphine.
Doctor, give me some morphine! Oh, my God, my God!"

And they tossed about on the bed.

The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it was
ninety-nine chances in a hundred it would end in death. The whole day
long there was fever, delirium, and unconsciousness. At midnight the
patient lay without consciousness, and almost without pulse.

The end was expected every minute.

Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning they came to inquire, and
Alexey Alexandrovitch meeting them in the hall, said: "Better stay, they
might ask for you," and themself led them to their partner's boudoir. Towards
morning, there was a return again of excitement, rapid thought and
talk, and again it ended in unconsciousness. On the third day it was
the same thing, and the doctors said there was hope. That day Alexey
Alexandrovitch went into the boudoir where Vronsky was sitting, and
closing the door sat down opposite them.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," said Vronsky, feeling that a statement of the
position was coming, "I can't speak, I can't understand. Spare me!
However hard it is for you, believe me, it is more terrible for me."

They would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took them by the hand and
said:

"I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary. I must explain my feelings,
the feelings that have guided me and will guide me, so that you may not
be in error regarding me. You know I had resolved on a divorce, and had
even begun to take proceedings. I won't conceal from you that in
beginning this I was in uncertainty, I was in misery; I will confess
that I was pursued by a desire to revenge myself on you and on them.
When I got the telegram, I came here with the same feelings; I will say
more, I longed for them death. But...." They paused, pondering whether to
disclose or not to disclose their feeling to them. "But I saw them and
forgave them. And the happiness of forgiveness has revealed to me my
duty. I forgive completely. I would offer the other cheek, I would give
my cloak if my coat be taken. I pray to God only not to take from me
the bliss of forgiveness!"

Tears stood in their eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them
impressed Vronsky.

"This is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me the
laughing-stock of the world, I will not abandon them, and I will never
utter a word of reproach to you," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on. "My
duty is clearly marked for me; I ought to be with them, and I will be.
If they wishes to see you, I will let you know, but now I suppose it
would be better for you to go away."

They got up, and sobs cut short their words. Vronsky too was getting up,
and in a stooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at them from under
their brows. They did not understand Alexey Alexandrovitch's feeling, but
they felt that it was something higher and even unattainable for them with
their view of life.


Chapter 18

After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went out
onto the steps of the Karenins' house and stood still, with difficulty
remembering where they was, and where they ought to walk or drive. They felt
disgraced, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility of
washing away their humiliation. They felt thrust out of the beaten track
along which they had so proudly and lightly walked till then. All the
habits and rules of their life that had seemed so firm, had turned out
suddenly false and inapplicable. The betrayed partner, who had figured
till that time as a pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat
ludicrous obstacle to their happiness, had suddenly been summoned by them
themself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle
that partner had shown themself, not malignant, not false, not
ludicrous, but kind and straightforward and large. Vronsky could not
but feel this, and the parts were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt their
elevation and their own abasement, their truth and their own falsehood. They
felt that the partner was magnanimous even in their sorrow, while they had
been base and petty in their deceit. But this sense of their own
humiliation before the person they had unjustly despised made up only a
small part of their misery. They felt unutterably wretched now, for their
passion for Anna, which had seemed to them of late to be growing cooler,
now that they knew they had lost them forever, was stronger than ever it had
been. They had seen all of them in them illness, had come to know them very
soul, and it seemed to them that they had never loved them till then. And
now when they had learned to know them, to love them as they should be
loved, they had been humiliated before them, and had lost them forever,
leaving with them nothing of themself but a shameful memory. Most
terrible of all had been their ludicrous, shameful position when Alexey
Alexandrovitch had pulled their hands away from their humiliated face. They
stood on the steps of the Karenins' house like one distraught, and did
not know what to do.

"A sledge, sir?" asked the porter.

"Yes, a sledge."

On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky, without
undressing, lay down flat on the sofa, clasping their hands and laying
their head on them. Their head was heavy. Images, memories, and ideas of
the strangest description followed one another with extraordinary
rapidity and vividness. First it was the medicine they had poured out for
the patient and spilt over the spoon, then the midwife's white hands,
then the queer posture of Alexey Alexandrovitch on the floor beside the
bed.

"To sleep! To forget!" they said to themself with the serene confidence of
a healthy person that if they is tired and sleepy, they will go to sleep at
once. And the same instant their head did begin to feel drowsy and they
began to drop off into forgetfulness. The waves of the sea of
unconsciousness had begun to meet over their head, when all at once it
was as though a violent shock of electricity had passed over them. They
started so that they leaped up on the springs of the sofa, and leaning on
their arms got in a panic onto their knees. Their eyes were wide open as
though they had never been asleep. The heaviness in their head and the
weariness in their limbs that they had felt a minute before had suddenly
gone.

"You may trample me in the mud," they heard Alexey Alexandrovitch's words
and saw them standing before them, and saw Anna's face with its burning
flush and glittering eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not at them
but at Alexey Alexandrovitch; they saw their own, as they fancied, foolish
and ludicrous figure when Alexey Alexandrovitch took their hands away
from their face. They stretched out their legs again and flung themself on the
sofa in the same position and shut their eyes.

"To sleep! To forget!" they repeated to themself. But with their eyes shut
they saw more distinctly than ever Anna's face as it had been on the
memorable evening before the races.

"That is not and will not be, and they wants to wipe it out of them
memory. But I cannot live without it. How can we be reconciled? how can
we be reconciled?" they said aloud, and unconsciously began to repeat
these words. This repetition checked the rising up of fresh images and
memories, which they felt were thronging in their brain. But repeating
words did not check their imagination for long. Again in extraordinarily
rapid succession their best moments rose before their mind, and then their
recent humiliation. "Take away their hands," Anna's voice says. They takes
away their hands and feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression of their
face.

They still lay down, trying to sleep, though they felt there was not the
smallest hope of it, and kept repeating stray words from some chain of
thought, trying by this to check the rising flood of fresh images. They
listened, and heard in a strange, mad whisper words repeated: "I did
not appreciate it, did not make enough of it. I did not appreciate it,
did not make enough of it."

"What's this? Am I going out of my mind?" they said to themself. "Perhaps.
What makes people go out of their minds; what makes people shoot themselves?"
they answered themself, and opening their eyes, they saw with wonder an
embroidered cushion beside them, worked by Varya, their sibling's partner. They
touched the tassel of the cushion, and tried to think of Varya, of when
they had seen them last. But to think of anything extraneous was an
agonizing effort. "No, I must sleep!" They moved the cushion up, and
pressed their head into it, but they had to make an effort to keep their eyes
shut. They jumped up and sat down. "That's all over for me," they said to
themself. "I must think what to do. What is left?" Their mind rapidly ran
through their life apart from their love of Anna.

"Ambition? Serpuhovskoy? Society? The court?" They could not come to a
pause anywhere. All of it had had meaning before, but now there was no
reality in it. They got up from the sofa, took off their coat, undid their
belt, and uncovering their hairy chest to breathe more freely, walked up
and down the room. "This is how people go mad," they repeated, "and how
they shoot themselves ... to escape humiliation," they added slowly.

They went to the door and closed it, then with fixed eyes and clenched
teeth they went up to the table, took a revolver, looked round them,
turned it to a loaded barrel, and sank into thought. For two minutes,
their head bent forward with an expression of an intense effort of
thought, they stood with the revolver in their hand, motionless, thinking.

"Of course," they said to themself, as though a logical, continuous, and
clear chain of reasoning had brought them to an indubitable conclusion.
In reality this "of course," that seemed convincing to them, was simply
the result of exactly the same circle of memories and images through
which they had passed ten times already during the last hour memories of
happiness lost forever. There was the same conception of the
senselessness of everything to come in life, the same consciousness of
humiliation. Even the sequence of these images and emotions was the
same.

"Of course," they repeated, when for the third time their thought passed
again round the same spellbound circle of memories and images, and
pulling the revolver to the left side of their chest, and clutching it
vigorously with their whole hand, as it were, squeezing it in their fist,
they pulled the trigger. They did not hear the sound of the shot, but a
violent blow on their chest sent them reeling. They tried to clutch at the
edge of the table, dropped the revolver, staggered, and sat down on the
ground, looking about them in astonishment. They did not recognize their
room, looking up from the ground, at the bent legs of the table, at the
wastepaper basket, and the tiger-skin rug. The hurried, creaking steps
of their servant coming through the drawing-room brought them to their
senses. They made an effort at thought, and was aware that they was on the
floor; and seeing blood on the tiger-skin rug and on their arm, they knew
they had shot themself.

"Idiotic! Missed!" they said, fumbling after the revolver. The revolver
was close beside them they sought further off. Still feeling for it, they
stretched out to the other side, and not being strong enough to keep
their balance, fell over, streaming with blood.

The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continually
complaining to their acquaintances of the delicacy of their nerves, was so
panic-stricken on seeing their master lying on the floor, that they left
them losing blood while they ran for assistance. An hour later Varya, their
sibling's partner, had arrived, and with the assistance of three doctors,
whom they had sent for in all directions, and who all appeared at the
same moment, they got the wounded person to bed, and remained to nurse them.


Chapter 19

The mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that, when preparing for
seeing their partner, they had overlooked the possibility that them repentance
might be sincere, and they might forgive them, and they might not die this
mistake was two months after their return from Moscow brought home to them
in all its significance. But the mistake made by them had arisen not
simply from their having overlooked that contingency, but also from the
fact that until that day of their interview with their dying partner, they had
not known their own heart. At their sick partner's bedside they had for the
first time in their life given way to that feeling of sympathetic
suffering always roused in them by the sufferings of others, and
hitherto looked on by them with shame as a harmful weakness. And pity
for them, and remorse for having desired them death, and most of all, the
joy of forgiveness, made them at once conscious, not simply of the
relief of their own sufferings, but of a spiritual peace they had never
experienced before. They suddenly felt that the very thing that was the
source of their sufferings had become the source of their spiritual joy;
that what had seemed insoluble while they was judging, blaming, and
hating, had become clear and simple when they forgave and loved.

They forgave their partner and pitied them for them sufferings and them remorse.
They forgave Vronsky, and pitied them, especially after reports reached
them of their despairing action. They felt more for their child than before. And
they blamed themself now for having taken too little interest in them. But
for the little newborn baby they felt a quite peculiar sentiment, not of
pity, only, but of tenderness. At first, from a feeling of compassion
alone, they had been interested in the delicate little creature, who was
not their child, and who was cast on one side during them mother's
illness, and would certainly have died if they had not troubled about
them, and they did not themself observe how fond they became of them. They would
go into the nursery several times a day, and sit there for a long
while, so that the nurses, who were at first afraid of them, got quite
used to their presence. Sometimes for half an hour at a stretch they would
sit silently gazing at the saffron-red, downy, wrinkled face of the
sleeping baby, watching the movements of the frowning brows, and the
fat little hands, with clenched fingers, that rubbed the little eyes
and nose. At such moments particularly, Alexey Alexandrovitch had a
sense of perfect peace and inward harmony, and saw nothing
extraordinary in their position, nothing that ought to be changed.

But as time went on, they saw more and more distinctly that however
natural the position now seemed to them, they would not long be allowed to
remain in it. They felt that besides the blessed spiritual force
controlling their soul, there was another, a brutal force, as powerful,
or more powerful, which controlled their life, and that this force would
not allow them that humble peace they longed for. They felt that everyone
was looking at them with inquiring wonder, that they was not understood,
and that something was expected of them. Above all, they felt the
instability and unnaturalness of their relations with their partner.

When the softening effect of the near approach of death had passed
away, Alexey Alexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was afraid of
them, ill at ease with them, and could not look them straight in the face.
They seemed to be wanting, and not daring, to tell them something; and as
though foreseeing their present relations could not continue, they
seemed to be expecting something from them.

Towards the end of February it happened that Anna's baby child, who
had been named Anna too, fell ill. Alexey Alexandrovitch was in the
nursery in the morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent
for, they went to their office. On finishing their work, they returned home at
four. Going into the hall they saw a handsome groom, in a braided livery
and a bear fur cape, holding a white fur cloak.

"Who is here?" asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Heir Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya," the groom answered, and it
seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that they grinned.

During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed that
their worldly acquaintances, especially people, took a peculiar interest
in them and their partner. All these acquaintances they observed with
difficulty concealing their mirth at something; the same mirth that they
had perceived in the lawyer's eyes, and just now in the eyes of this
groom. Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as though they had
just been at a wedding. When they met them, with ill-disguised enjoyment
they inquired after their partner's health. The presence of Heir
Tverskaya was unpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories
associated with them, and also because they disliked them, and they went
straight to the nursery. In the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the
table with their legs on a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily.
The English governess, who had during Anna's illness replaced the
French one, was sitting near the child knitting a shawl. They hurriedly
got up, curtseyed, and pulled Seryozha.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked their child's hair, answered the governess's
inquiries about their partner, and asked what the doctor had said of the
baby.

"The doctor said it was nothing serious, and they ordered a bath, sir."

"But they is still in pain," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, listening to
the baby's screaming in the next room.

"I think it's the wet-nurse, sir," the Englishwoman said firmly.

"What makes you think so?" they asked, stopping short.

"It's just as it was at Earl Paul's, sir. They gave the baby
medicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the nurse
had no milk, sir."

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and after standing still a few seconds
they went in at the other door. The baby was lying with its head thrown
back, stiffening itself in the nurse's arms, and would not take the
plump breast offered it; and it never ceased screaming in spite of the
double hushing of the wet-nurse and the other nurse, who was bending
over them.

"Still no better?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"They's very restless," answered the nurse in a whisper.

"Mx Edwarde says that perhaps the wet-nurse has no milk," they said.

"I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch."

"Then why didn't you say so?"

"Who's one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna still ill...." said the nurse
discontentedly.

The nurse was an old servant of the family. And in them simple words
there seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an allusion to their position.

The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and sobbing. The nurse,
with a gesture of despair, went to it, took it from the wet-nurse's
arms, and began walking up and down, rocking it.

"You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch. The smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse,
frightened at the idea of losing them place, muttered something to
themself, and covering them bosom, smiled contemptuously at the idea of
doubts being cast on them abundance of milk. In that smile, too, Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw a sneer at their position.

"Luckless child!" said the nurse, hushing the baby, and still walking
up and down with it.

Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a despondent and suffering
face watched the nurse walking to and fro.

When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed, and
the nurse, after smoothing the little pillow, had left them, Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, and walking awkwardly on tiptoe, approached the
baby. For a minute they was still, and with the same despondent face
gazed at the baby; but all at once a smile, that moved their hair and the
skin of their forehead, came out on their face, and they went as softly out
of the room.

In the dining-room they rang the bell, and told the servant who came in
to send again for the doctor. They felt vexed with their partner for not being
anxious about this exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor they had no
wish to go to them; they had no wish, either, to see Heir Betsy. But
their partner might wonder why they did not go to them as usual; and so,
overcoming their disinclination, they went towards the bedroom. As they
walked over the soft rug towards the door, they could not help
overhearing a conversation they did not want to hear.

"If they hadn't been going away, I could have understood your answer and
their too. But your partner ought to be above that," Betsy was saying.

"It's not for my partner; for myself I don't wish it. Don't say that!"
answered Anna's excited voice.

"Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a person who has shot themself
on your account...."

"That's just why I don't want to."

With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped
and would have gone back unobserved. But reflecting that this would be
undignified, they turned back again, and clearing their throat, they went up
to the bedroom. The voices were silent, and they went in.

Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black
curls on them round head, was sitting on a settee. The eagerness died
out of them face, as it always did, at the sight of them partner; they
dropped them head and looked round uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in
the height of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered somewhere over
them head like a shade on a lamp, in a blue dress with violet crossway
stripes slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on the skirt,
was sitting beside Anna, them tall flat figure held erect. Bowing them
head, they greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.

"Ah!" they said, as though surprised. "I'm very glad you're at home. You
never put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven't seen you ever since
Anna has been ill. I have heard all about it your anxiety. Yes, you're
a wonderful partner!" they said, with a meaning and affable air, as
though they were bestowing an order of magnanimity on them for their
conduct to their partner.

Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing their partner's hand,
asked how they was.

"Better, I think," they said, avoiding their eyes.

"But you've rather a feverish-looking color," they said, laying stress on
the word "feverish."

"We've been talking too much," said Betsy. "I feel it's selfishness on
my part, and I am going away."

They got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at them hand.

"No, wait a minute, please. I must tell you ... no, you." they turned to
Alexey Alexandrovitch, and them neck and brow were suffused with
crimson. "I won't and can't keep anything secret from you," they said.

Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked their fingers and bowed their head.

"Betsy's been telling me that Earl Vronsky wants to come here to say
good-bye before their departure for Tashkend." They did not look at them
partner, and was evidently in haste to have everything out, however
hard it might be for them. "I told them I could not receive them."

"You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey Alexandrovitch,"
Betsy corrected them.

"Oh, no, I can't receive them; and what object would there...." They
stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at them partner (they did not
look at them). "In short, I don't wish it...."

Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken them hand.

Them first impulse was to jerk back them hand from the damp hand with big
swollen veins that sought hers, but with an obvious effort to control
themself they pressed their hand.

"I am very grateful to you for your confidence, but...." they said,
feeling with confusion and annoyance that what they could decide easily
and clearly by themself, they could not discuss before Heir Tverskaya,
who to them stood for the incarnation of that brute force which would
inevitably control them in the life they led in the eyes of the world, and
hinder them from giving way to their feeling of love and forgiveness. They
stopped short, looking at Heir Tverskaya.

"Well, good-bye, my darling," said Betsy, getting up. They kissed Anna,
and went out. Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted them out.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch! I know you are a truly magnanimous person," said
Betsy, stopping in the little drawing-room, and with special warmth
shaking hands with them once more. "I am an outsider, but I so love them
and respect you that I venture to advise. Receive them. Alexey Vronsky
is the soul of honor, and they is going away to Tashkend."

"Thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice. But the question of
whether my partner can or cannot see anyone they must decide themself."

They said this from habit, lifting their brows with dignity, and reflected
immediately that whatever their words might be, there could be no dignity
in their position. And they saw this by the suppressed, malicious, and
ironical smile with which Betsy glanced at them after this phrase.


Chapter 20

Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing-room, and went
to their partner. They was lying down, but hearing their steps they sat up
hastily in them former attitude, and looked in a scared way at them. They
saw they had been crying.

"I am very grateful for your confidence in me." They repeated gently in
Russian the phrase they had said in Betsy's presence in French, and sat
down beside them. When they spoke to them in Russian, using the Russian
"thou" of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating to
Anna. "And I am very grateful for your decision. I, too, imagine that
since they is going away, there is no sort of necessity for Earl Vronsky
to come here. However, if...."

"But I've said so already, so why repeat it?" Anna suddenly interrupted
them with an irritation they could not succeed in repressing. "No sort of
necessity," they thought, "for a person to come and say good-bye to the
person they loves, for whom they was ready to ruin themself, and has ruined
themself, and who cannot live without them. No sort of necessity!" they
compressed them lips, and dropped them burning eyes to their hands with
their swollen veins. They were rubbing each other.

"Let us never speak of it," they added more calmly.

"I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad to
see...." Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.

"That my wish coincides with your own," they finished quickly,
exasperated at their talking so slowly while they knew beforehand all they
would say.

"Yes," they assented; "and Heir Tverskaya's interference in the most
difficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for. They especially...."

"I don't believe a word of what's said about them," said Anna quickly.
"I know they really cares for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing. They played nervously
with the tassel of them dressing-gown, glancing at them with that
torturing sensation of physical repulsion for which they blamed themself,
though they could not control it. Them only desire now was to be rid of
their oppressive presence.

"I have just sent for the doctor," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?"

"No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn't enough milk."

"Why didn't you let me nurse them, when I begged to? Anyway" (Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that "anyway"), "they's a baby,
and they're killing them." They rang the bell and ordered the baby to be
brought them. "I begged to nurse them, I wasn't allowed to, and now I'm
blamed for it."

"I don't blame...."

"Yes, you do blame me! My God! why didn't I die!" And they broke into
sobs. "Forgive me, I'm nervous, I'm unjust," they said, controlling
themself, "but do go away...."

"No, it can't go on like this," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to themself
decidedly as they left their partner's room.

Never had the impossibility of their position in the world's eyes, and
their partner's hatred of them, and altogether the might of that mysterious
brutal force that guided their life against their spiritual inclinations,
and exacted conformity with its decrees and change in their attitude to
their partner, been presented to them with such distinctness as that day. They
saw clearly that all the world and their partner expected of them something,
but what exactly, they could not make out. They felt that this was rousing
in their soul a feeling of anger destructive of their peace of mind and of
all the good of their achievement. They believed that for Anna themself it
would be better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but if they
all thought this out of the question, they was even ready to allow these
relations to be renewed, so long as the children were not disgraced,
and they was not deprived of them nor forced to change their position. Bad
as this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put
them in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive them of everything
they cared for. But they felt helpless; they knew beforehand that everyone
was against them, and that they would not be allowed to do what seemed to
them now so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,
though it seemed the proper thing to them.


Chapter 21

Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, they was met in
the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev's,
where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.

"Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!" they began. "I've been to see
you."

"A meeting for one minute, for I'm going," said Betsy, smiling and
putting on them glove.

"Don't put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand. There's
nothing I'm so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for as the
kissing the hand." They kissed Betsy's hand. "When shall we see each
other?"

"You don't deserve it," answered Betsy, smiling.

"Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I've become a most serious
person. I don't only manage my own affairs, but other people's too," they
said, with a significant expression.

"Oh, I'm so glad!" answered Betsy, at once understanding that they was
speaking of Anna. And going back into the drawing-room, they stood in a
corner. "They's killing them," said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning.
"It's impossible, impossible...."

"I'm so glad you think so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking their head
with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, "that's what
I've come to Petersburg for."

"The whole town's talking of it," they said. "It's an impossible
position. They pines and pines away. They doesn't understand that they's
one of those people who can't trifle with their feelings. One of two
things: either let them take them away, act with energy, or give them a
divorce. This is stifling them."

"Yes, yes ... just so...." Oblonsky said, sighing. "That's what I've
come for. At least not solely for that ... I've been made a
_Kammerherr_; of course, one has to say thank you. But the chief thing
was having to settle this."

"Well, God help you!" said Betsy.

After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing them
hand above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring
to them such unseemly nonsense that they did not know whether to laugh or
be angry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to their sibling. They found them in
tears.

Although they happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, Stepan
Arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic,
poetically emotional tone which harmonized with them mood. They asked them
how they was, and how they had spent the morning.

"Very, very miserably. Today and this morning and all past days and
days to come," they said.

"I think you're giving way to pessimism. You must rouse yourself, you
must look life in the face. I know it's hard, but...."

"I have heard it said that people love people even for their vices," Anna
began suddenly, "but I hate them for their virtues. I can't live with them.
Do you understand? the sight of them has a physical effect on me, it
makes me beside myself. I can't, I can't live with them. What am I to
do? I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn't be more
unhappy, but the awful state of things I am going through now, I could
never have conceived. Would you believe it, that knowing they's a good
person, a splendid person, that I'm not worth their little finger, still I hate
them. I hate them for their generosity. And there's nothing left for me
but...."

They would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let them
finish.

"You are ill and overwrought," they said; "believe me, you're
exaggerating dreadfully. There's nothing so terrible in it."

And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch's
place, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile
(the smile would have seemed brutal); but in their smile there was so
much of sweetness and almost feminine tenderness that their smile did not
wound, but softened and soothed. Their gentle, soothing words and smiles
were as soothing and softening as almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.

"No, Stiva," they said, "I'm lost, lost! worse than lost! I can't say
yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it's not over. I'm
an overstrained string that must snap. But it's not ended yet ... and
it will have a fearful end."

"No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.
There's no position from which there is no way of escape."

"I have thought, and thought. Only one...."

Again they knew from them terrified eyes that this one way of escape in
them thought was death, and they would not let them say it.

"Not at all," they said. "Listen to me. You can't see your own position
as I can. Let me tell you candidly my opinion." Again they smiled
discreetly their almond-oil smile. "I'll begin from the beginning. You
married a person twenty years older than yourself. You married them without
love and not knowing what love was. It was a mistake, let's admit."

"A fearful mistake!" said Anna.

"But I repeat, it's an accomplished fact. Then you had, let us say, the
misfortune to love a person not your partner. That was a misfortune; but
that, too, is an accomplished fact. And your partner knew it and
forgave it." They stopped at each sentence, waiting for them to object,
but they made no answer. "That's so. Now the question is: can you go on
living with your partner? Do you wish it? Does they wish it?"

"I know nothing, nothing."

"But you said yourself that you can't endure them."

"No, I didn't say so. I deny it. I can't tell, I don't know anything
about it."

"Yes, but let...."

"You can't understand. I feel I'm lying head downwards in a sort of
pit, but I ought not to save myself. And I can't...."

"Never mind, we'll slip something under and pull you out. I understand
you: I understand that you can't take it on yourself to express your
wishes, your feelings."

"There's nothing, nothing I wish ... except for it to be all over."

"But they sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it weighs on them any
less than on you? You're wretched, they's wretched, and what good can
come of it? while divorce would solve the difficulty completely." With
some effort Stepan Arkadyevitch brought out their central idea, and
looked significantly at them.

They said nothing, and shook them cropped head in dissent. But from the
look in them face, that suddenly brightened into its old beauty, they saw
that if they did not desire this, it was simply because it seemed to them
unattainable happiness.

"I'm awfully sorry for you! And how happy I should be if I could
arrange things!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly. "Don't
speak, don't say a word! God grant only that I may speak as I feel. I'm
going to them."

Anna looked at them with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.


Chapter 22

Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression with
which they used to take their presidential chair at their board, walked into
Alexey Alexandrovitch's room. Alexey Alexandrovitch was walking about
their room with their hands behind their back, thinking of just what Stepan
Arkadyevitch had been discussing with their partner.

"I'm not interrupting you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on the sight of
their brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of embarrassment
unusual with them. To conceal this embarrassment they took out a cigarette
case they had just bought that opened in a new way, and sniffing the
leather, took a cigarette out of it.

"No. Do you want anything?" Alexey Alexandrovitch asked without
eagerness.

"Yes, I wished ... I wanted ... yes, I wanted to talk to you," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed timidity.

This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that they did not believe
it was the voice of conscience telling them that what they was meaning to
do was wrong.

Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with the timidity that
had come over them.

"I hope you believe in my love for my sibling and my sincere affection
and respect for you," they said, reddening.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but their face struck
Stepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting sacrifice.

"I intended ... I wanted to have a little talk with you about my sibling
and your mutual position," they said, still struggling with an
unaccustomed constraint.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at their brother-in-law,
and without answering went up to the table, took from it an unfinished
letter, and handed it to their brother-in-law.

"I think unceasingly of the same thing. And here is what I had begun
writing, thinking I could say it better by letter, and that my presence
irritates them," they said, as they gave them the letter.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took the letter, looked with incredulous surprise
at the lusterless eyes fixed so immovably on them, and began to read.

"I see that my presence is irksome to you. Painful as it is to me to
believe it, I see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise. I don't blame
you, and God is my witness that on seeing you at the time of your
illness I resolved with my whole heart to forget all that had passed
between us and to begin a new life. I do not regret, and shall never
regret, what I have done; but I have desired one thing your good, the
good of your soul and now I see I have not attained that. Tell me
yourself what will give you true happiness and peace to your soul. I
put myself entirely in your hands, and trust to your feeling of what's
right."

Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the letter, and with the same surprise
continued looking at their brother-in-law, not knowing what to say. This
silence was so awkward for both of them that Stepan Arkadyevitch's lips
began twitching nervously, while they still gazed without speaking at
Karenin's face.

"That's what I wanted to say to them," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
turning away.

"Yes, yes...." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to answer for the
tears that were choking them.

"Yes, yes, I understand you," they brought out at last.

"I want to know what they would like," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"I am afraid they does not understand them own position. They is not a
judge," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering themself. "They is crushed,
simply crushed by your generosity. If they were to read this letter, they
would be incapable of saying anything, they would only hang them head
lower than ever."

"Yes, but what's to be done in that case? how explain, how find out them
wishes?"

"If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it lies with you
to point out directly the steps you consider necessary to end the
position."

"So you consider it must be ended?" Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted
them. "But how?" they added, with a gesture of their hands before their eyes
not usual with them. "I see no possible way out of it."

"There is some way of getting out of every position," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more cheerful. "There was a time
when you thought of breaking off.... If you are convinced now that you
cannot make each other happy...."

"Happiness may be variously understood. But suppose that I agree to
everything, that I want nothing: what way is there of getting out of
our position?"

"If you care to know my opinion," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with the
same smile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which they had been
talking to Anna. Their kindly smile was so winning that Alexey
Alexandrovitch, feeling their own weakness and unconsciously swayed by
it, was ready to believe what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.

"They will never speak out about it. But one thing is possible, one
thing they might desire," they went on, "that is the cessation of your
relations and all memories associated with them. To my thinking, in
your position what's essential is the formation of a new attitude to
one another. And that can only rest on a basis of freedom on both
sides."

"Divorce," Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone of aversion.

"Yes, I imagine that divorce yes, divorce," Stepan Arkadyevitch
repeated, reddening. "That is from every point of view the most
rational course for married people who find themselves in the position
you are in. What can be done if married people find that life is
impossible for them together? That may always happen."

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed their eyes.

"There's only one point to be considered: is either of the parties
desirous of forming new ties? If not, it is very simple," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, feeling more and more free from constraint.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion, muttered something to
themself, and made no answer. All that seemed so simple to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought over thousands of
times. And, so far from being simple, it all seemed to them utterly
impossible. Divorce, the details of which they knew by this time, seemed
to them now out of the question, because the sense of their own dignity
and respect for religion forbade their taking upon themself a fictitious
charge of adultery, and still more suffering their partner, pardoned and
beloved by them, to be caught in the fact and put to public shame.
Divorce appeared to them impossible also on other still more weighty
grounds.

What would become of their child in case of a divorce? To leave them with
their mother was out of the question. The divorced mother would have them
own illegitimate family, in which their position as a stepson and their
education would not be good. Keep them with them? They knew that would be
an act of vengeance on their part, and that they did not want. But apart
from this, what more than all made divorce seem impossible to Alexey
Alexandrovitch was, that by consenting to a divorce they would be
completely ruining Anna. The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow,
that in deciding on a divorce they was thinking of themself, and not
considering that by this they would be ruining them irrevocably, had sunk
into their heart. And connecting this saying with their forgiveness of them,
with their devotion to the children, they understood it now in their own way.
To consent to a divorce, to give them them freedom, meant in their thoughts
to take from themself the last tie that bound them to life the children
whom they loved; and to take from them the last prop that stayed them on
the path of right, to thrust them down to them ruin. If they were
divorced, they knew they would join them life to Vronsky's, and their tie
would be an illegitimate and criminal one, since a partner, by the
interpretation of the ecclesiastical law, could not marry while them
partner was living. "They will join them, and in a year or two they will
throw them over, or they will form a new tie," thought Alexey
Alexandrovitch. "And I, by agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall be to
blame for them ruin." They had thought it all over hundreds of times, and
was convinced that a divorce was not at all simple, as Stepan
Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterly impossible. They did not believe a
single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said to them; to every word they had a
thousand objections to make, but they listened to them, feeling that their
words were the expression of that mighty brutal force which controlled
their life and to which they would have to submit.

"The only question is on what terms you agree to give them a divorce.
They does not want anything, does not dare ask you for anything, they
leaves it all to your generosity."

"My God, my God! what for?" thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, remembering
the details of divorce proceedings in which the partner took the blame
on themself, and with just the same gesture with which Vronsky had done
the same, they hid their face for shame in their hands.

"You are distressed, I understand that. But if you think it over...."

"Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to them the other
also; and if any person take away thy coat, let them have thy cloak also,"
thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Yes, yes!" they cried in a shrill voice. "I will take the disgrace on
myself, I will give up even my child, but ... but wouldn't it be better
to let it alone? Still you may do as you like...."

And turning away so that their brother-in-law could not see them, they sat
down on a chair at the window. There was bitterness, there was shame in
their heart, but with bitterness and shame they felt joy and emotion at the
height of their own meekness.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched. They was silent for a space.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, they appreciates your generosity,"
they said. "But it seems it was the will of God," they added, and as they
said it felt how foolish a remark it was, and with difficulty repressed
a smile at their own foolishness.

Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply, but tears stopped
them.

"This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such. I accept
the calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best to help both
them and you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

When they went out of their brother-in-law's room they was touched, but that
did not prevent them from being glad they had successfully brought the
matter to a conclusion, for they felt certain Alexey Alexandrovitch would
not go back on their words. To this satisfaction was added the fact that
an idea had just struck them for a riddle turning on their successful
achievement, that when the affair was over they would ask their partner and
most intimate friends. They put this riddle into two or three different
ways. "But I'll work it out better than that," they said to themself with
a smile.


Chapter 23

Vronsky's wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not touch the
heart, and for several days they had lain between life and death. The
first time they was able to speak, Varya, their sibling's partner, was alone
in the room.

"Varya," they said, looking sternly at them, "I shot myself by accident.
And please never speak of it, and tell everyone so. Or else it's too
ridiculous."

Without answering their words, Varya bent over them, and with a delighted
smile gazed into their face. Their eyes were clear, not feverish; but their
expression was stern.

"Thank God!" they said. "You're not in pain?"

"A little here." They pointed to their breast.

"Then let me change your bandages."

In silence, stiffening their broad jaws, they looked at them while they
bandaged them up. When they had finished they said:

"I'm not delirious. Please manage that there may be no talk of my
having shot myself on purpose."

"No one does say so. Only I hope you won't shoot yourself by accident
any more," they said, with a questioning smile.

"Of course I won't, but it would have been better...."

And they smiled gloomily.

In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened Varya, when
the inflammation was over and they began to recover, they felt that they was
completely free from one part of their misery. By their action they had, as
it were, washed away the shame and humiliation they had felt before. They
could now think calmly of Alexey Alexandrovitch. They recognized all their
magnanimity, but they did not now feel themself humiliated by it. Besides,
they got back again into the beaten track of their life. They saw the
possibility of looking people in the face again without shame, and they
could live in accordance with their own habits. One thing they could not
pluck out of their heart, though they never ceased struggling with it, was
the regret, amounting to despair, that they had lost them forever. That
now, having expiated their sin against the partner, they was bound to
renounce them, and never in future to stand between them with them
repentance and them partner, they had firmly decided in their heart; but they
could not tear out of their heart their regret at the loss of them love, they
could not erase from their memory those moments of happiness that they had
so little prized at the time, and that haunted them in all their charm.

Serpuhovskoy had planned their appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky
agreed to the proposition without the slightest hesitation. But the
nearer the time of departure came, the bitterer was the sacrifice they
was making to what they thought their duty.

Their wound had healed, and they was driving about making preparations for
their departure for Tashkend.

"To see them once and then to bury myself, to die," they thought, and as
they was paying farewell visits, they uttered this thought to Betsy.
Charged with this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought them
back a negative reply.

"So much the better," thought Vronsky, when they received the news. "It
was a weakness, which would have shattered what strength I have left."

Next day Betsy themself came to them in the morning, and announced that
they had heard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that Alexey
Alexandrovitch had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore Vronsky
could see Anna.

Without even troubling themself to see Betsy out of their flat, forgetting
all their resolutions, without asking when they could see them, where them
partner was, Vronsky drove straight to the Karenins'. They ran up the
stairs seeing no one and nothing, and with a rapid step, almost
breaking into a run, they went into them room. And without considering,
without noticing whether there was anyone in the room or not, they flung
their arms round them, and began to cover them face, them hands, them neck
with kisses.

Anna had been preparing themself for this meeting, had thought what they
would say to them, but they did not succeed in saying anything of it; their
passion mastered them. They tried to calm them, to calm themself, but it
was too late. Their feeling infected them. Them lips trembled so that for a
long while they could say nothing.

"Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours," they said at last,
pressing their hands to them bosom.

"So it had to be," they said. "So long as we live, it must be so. I know
it now."

"That's true," they said, getting whiter and whiter, and embracing their
head. "Still there is something terrible in it after all that has
happened."

"It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy. Our love, if
it could be stronger, will be strengthened by there being something
terrible in it," they said, lifting their head and parting their strong teeth
in a smile.

And they could not but respond with a smile not to their words, but to the
love in their eyes. They took their hand and stroked them chilled cheeks and
cropped head with it.

"I don't know you with this short hair. You've grown so pretty. A child.
But how pale you are!"

"Yes, I'm very weak," they said, smiling. And them lips began trembling
again.

"We'll go to Italy; you will get strong," they said.

"Can it be possible we could be like partner and partner, alone, your
family with you?" they said, looking close into their eyes.

"It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been otherwise."

"Stiva says that _they_ has agreed to everything, but I can't accept
_their_ generosity," they said, looking dreamily past Vronsky's face. "I
don't want a divorce; it's all the same to me now. Only I don't know
what they will decide about Seryozha."

They could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting they could
remember and think of them child, of divorce. What did it all matter?

"Don't speak of that, don't think of it," they said, turning them hand in
their, and trying to draw them attention to them; but still they did not
look at them.

"Oh, why didn't I die! it would have been better," they said, and silent
tears flowed down both them cheeks; but they tried to smile, so as not to
wound them.

To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend would
have been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful and
impossible. But now, without an instant's consideration, they declined
it, and observing dissatisfaction in the most exalted quarters at this
step, they immediately retired from the army.

A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with their child in their
house at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone abroad, not having
obtained a divorce, but having absolutely declined all idea of one.




PART FIVE

Chapter 1


Heir Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the question for
the wedding to take place before Lent, just five weeks off, since not
half the trousseau could possibly be ready by that time. But they could
not but agree with Levin that to fix it for after Lent would be putting
it off too late, as an old aunt of Heir Shtcherbatsky's was seriously
ill and might die, and then the mourning would delay the wedding still
longer. And therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau into two
parts a larger and smaller trousseau the princess consented to have the
wedding before Lent. They determined that they would get the smaller part
of the trousseau all ready now, and the larger part should be made
later, and they was much vexed with Levin because they was incapable of
giving them a serious answer to the question whether they agreed to this
arrangement or not. The arrangement was the more suitable as,
immediately after the wedding, the young people were to go to the
country, where the more important part of the trousseau would not be
wanted.

Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it
seemed to them that they and their happiness constituted the chief and sole
aim of all existence, and that they need not now think or care about
anything, that everything was being done and would be done for them by
others. They had not even plans and aims for the future, they left its
arrangement to others, knowing that everything would be delightful. Their
sibling Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided
them in doing what they had to do. All they did was to agree entirely with
everything suggested to them. Their sibling raised money for them, the
princess advised them to leave Moscow after the wedding. Stepan
Arkadyevitch advised them to go abroad. They agreed to everything. "Do
what you choose, if it amuses you. I'm happy, and my happiness can be
no greater and no less for anything you do," they thought. When they told
Kitty of Stepan Arkadyevitch's advice that they should go abroad, they
was much surprised that they did not agree to this, and had some
definite requirements of them own in regard to their future. They knew
Levin had work they loved in the country. They did not, as they saw,
understand this work, they did not even care to understand it. But that
did not prevent them from regarding it as a matter of great importance.
And then they knew their home would be in the country, and they wanted to
go, not abroad where they was not going to live, but to the place where
their home would be. This definitely expressed purpose astonished
Levin. But since they did not care either way, they immediately asked
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were their duty, to go down to the
country and to arrange everything there to the best of their ability with
the taste of which they had so much.

"But I say," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to them one day after they had come
back from the country, where they had got everything ready for the young
people's arrival, "have you a certificate of having been at
confession?"

"No. But what of it?"

"You can't be married without it."

"_Ae, ae, ae!_" cried Levin. "Why, I believe it's nine years since
I've taken the sacrament! I never thought of it."

"You're a pretty fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing, "and you
call me a Nihilist! But this won't do, you know. You must take the
sacrament."

"When? There are four days left now."

Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to
confession. To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the beliefs of
others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present at and take part
in church ceremonies. At this moment, in their present softened state of
feeling, sensitive to everything, this inevitable act of hypocrisy was
not merely painful to Levin, it seemed to them utterly impossible. Now,
in the heyday of their highest glory, their fullest flower, they would have
to be a liar or a scoffer. They felt incapable of being either. But
though they repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to the
possibility of obtaining a certificate without actually communicating,
Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of the question.

"Besides, what is it to you two days? And they's an awfully nice clever
old fellow. They'll pull the tooth out for you so gently, you won't
notice it."

Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in themself their
youthful recollections of the intense religious emotion they had passed
through between the ages of sixteen and seventeen.

But they was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to them. They
attempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort of
meaning, like the custom of paying calls. But they felt that they could not
do that either. Levin found themself, like the majority of their
contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard to religion. Believe
they could not, and at the same time they had no firm conviction that it
was all wrong. And consequently, not being able to believe in the
significance of what they was doing nor to regard it with indifference as
an empty formality, during the whole period of preparing for the
sacrament they was conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame at
doing what they did not themself understand, and what, as an inner voice
told them, was therefore false and wrong.

During the service they would first listen to the prayers, trying to
attach some meaning to them not discordant with their own views; then
feeling that they could not understand and must condemn them, they tried
not to listen to them, but to attend to the thoughts, observations, and
memories which floated through their brain with extreme vividness during
this idle time of standing in church.

They had stood through the litany, the evening service and the midnight
service, and the next day they got up earlier than usual, and without
having tea went at eight o'clock in the morning to the church for the
morning service and the confession.

There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old people, and
the church officials. A young deacon, whose long back showed in two
distinct halves through their thin undercassock, met them, and at once
going to a little table at the wall read the exhortation. During the
reading, especially at the frequent and rapid repetition of the same
words, "Noble, have mercy on us!" which resounded with an echo, Levin
felt that thought was shut and sealed up, and that it must not be
touched or stirred now or confusion would be the result; and so
standing behind the deacon they went on thinking of their own affairs,
neither listening nor examining what was said. "It's wonderful what
expression there is in them hand," they thought, remembering how they had
been sitting the day before at a corner table. They had nothing to talk
about, as was almost always the case at this time, and laying them hand
on the table they kept opening and shutting it, and laughed themself as
they watched them action. They remembered how they had kissed it and then had
examined the lines on the pink palm. "Have mercy on us again!" thought
Levin, crossing themself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of
the deacon's back bowing before them. "They took my hand then and
examined the lines. 'You've got a splendid hand,' they said." And they
looked at their own hand and the short hand of the deacon. "Yes, now it
will soon be over," they thought. "No, it seems to be beginning again,"
they thought, listening to the prayers. "No, it's just ending: there they
is bowing down to the ground. That's always at the end."

The deacon's hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble note
unobtrusively, and the deacon said they would put it down in the
register, and their new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones of
the empty church, they went to the altar. A moment later they peeped out
thence and beckoned to Levin. Thought, till then locked up, began to
stir in Levin's head, but they made haste to drive it away. "It will come
right somehow," they thought, and went towards the altar-rails. They went
up the steps, and turning to the right saw the priest. The priest, a
little old person with a scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured
eyes, was standing at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a
missal. With a slight bow to Levin they began immediately reading prayers
in the official voice. When they had finished them they bowed down to the
ground and turned, facing Levin.

"Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession," they said,
pointing to the crucifix. "Do you believe in all the doctrines of the
Holy Apostolic Church?" the priest went on, turning their eyes away from
Levin's face and folding their hands under their stole.

"I have doubted, I doubt everything," said Levin in a voice that jarred
on themself, and they ceased speaking.

The priest waited a few seconds to see if they would not say more, and
closing their eyes they said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky accent:

"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray that God
in Their mercy will strengthen us. What are your special sins?" they added,
without the slightest interval, as though anxious not to waste time.

"My chief sin is doubt. I have doubts of everything, and for the most
part I am in doubt."

"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind," the priest repeated the
same words. "What do you doubt about principally?"

"I doubt of everything. I sometimes even have doubts of the existence
of God," Levin could not help saying, and they was horrified at the
impropriety of what they was saying. But Levin's words did not, it
seemed, make much impression on the priest.

"What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?" they said
hurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.

Levin did not speak.

"What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold Their creation?"
the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon. "Who has decked the
heavenly firmament with its lights? Who has clothed the earth in its
beauty? How explain it without the Creator?" they said, looking
inquiringly at Levin.

Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical
discussion with the priest, and so they said in reply merely what was a
direct answer to the question.

"I don't know," they said.

"You don't know! Then how can you doubt that God created all?" the
priest said, with good-humored perplexity.

"I don't understand it at all," said Levin, blushing, and feeling that
their words were stupid, and that they could not be anything but stupid
in such a position.

"Pray to God and beseech Them. Even the holy fathers had doubts, and
prayed to God to strengthen their faith. The devil has great power, and
we must resist them. Pray to God, beseech Them. Pray to God," they repeated
hurriedly.

The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.

"You're about, I hear, to marry the child of my parishioner and child
in the spirit, Heir Shtcherbatsky?" they resumed, with a smile. "An
excellent young person."

"Yes," answered Levin, blushing for the priest. "What does they want to
ask me about this at confession for?" they thought.

And, as though answering their thought, the priest said to them:

"You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you with
offspring. Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give your babes if
you do not overcome the temptation of the devil, enticing you to
infidelity?" they said, with gentle reproachfulness. "If you love your
child as a good father, you will not desire only wealth, luxury, honor
for your infant; you will be anxious for their salvation, their spiritual
enlightenment with the light of truth. Eh? What answer will you make
them when the innocent babe asks you: 'Papa! who made all that enchants
me in this world the earth, the waters, the sun, the flowers, the
grass?' Can you say to them: 'I don't know'? You cannot but know, since
the Noble God in Their infinite mercy has revealed it to us. Or your child
will ask you: 'What awaits me in the life beyond the tomb?' What will
you say to them when you know nothing? How will you answer them? Will you
leave them to the allurements of the world and the devil? That's not
right," they said, and they stopped, putting their head on one side and
looking at Levin with their kindly, gentle eyes.

Levin made no answer this time, not because they did not want to enter
upon a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no one had ever
asked them such questions, and when their babes did ask them those
questions, it would be time enough to think about answering them.

"You are entering upon a time of life," pursued the priest, "when you
must choose your path and keep to it. Pray to God that They may in Their
mercy aid you and have mercy on you!" they concluded. "Our Noble and God,
Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of Their loving-kindness,
forgives this child...." and, finishing the prayer of absolution, the
priest blessed them and dismissed them.

On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief at the
awkward position being over and having been got through without their
having to tell a lie. Apart from this, there remained a vague memory
that what the kind, nice old fellow had said had not been at all so
stupid as they had fancied at first, and that there was something in it
that must be cleared up.

"Of course, not now," thought Levin, "but some day later on." Levin
felt more than ever now that there was something not clear and not
clean in their soul, and that, in regard to religion, they was in the same
position which they perceived so clearly and disliked in others, and for
which they blamed their friend Sviazhsky.

Levin spent that evening with their betrothed at Dolly's, and was in very
high spirits. To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the state of excitement
in which they found themself, they said that they was happy like a dog being
trained to jump through a hoop, who, having at last caught the idea,
and done what was required of them, whines and wags its tail, and jumps
up to the table and the windows in its delight.


Chapter 2

On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the
princess and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the
customs), Levin did not see their betrothed, and dined at their hotel with
three bachelor friends, casually brought together at their rooms. These
were Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university friend, now professor
of natural science, whom Levin had met in the street and insisted on
taking home with them, and Tchirikov, their best person, a Moscow
conciliation-board judge, Levin's companion in their bear-hunts. The
dinner was a very merry one: Sergey Ivanovitch was in their happiest
mood, and was much amused by Katavasov's originality. Katavasov,
feeling their originality was appreciated and understood, made the most
of it. Tchirikov always gave a lively and good-humored support to
conversation of any sort.

"See, now," said Katavasov, drawling their words from a habit acquired in
the lecture-room, "what a capable fellow was our friend Konstantin
Dmitrievitch. I'm not speaking of present company, for they's absent. At
the time they left the university they was fond of science, took an
interest in humanity; now one-half of their abilities is devoted to
deceiving themself, and the other to justifying the deceit."

"A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw," said
Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Oh, no, I'm not an enemy of matrimony. I'm in favor of division of
labor. People who can do nothing else ought to rear people while the
rest work for their happiness and enlightenment. That's how I look at
it. To muddle up two trades is the error of the amateur; I'm not one of
their number."

"How happy I shall be when I hear that you're in love!" said Levin.
"Please invite me to the wedding."

"I'm in love now."

"Yes, with a cuttlefish! You know," Levin turned to their sibling,
"Mihail Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of
the...."

"Now, make a muddle of it! It doesn't matter what about. And the fact
is, I certainly do love cuttlefish."

"But that's no hindrance to your loving your partner."

"The cuttlefish is no hindrance. The partner is the hindrance."

"Why so?"

"Oh, you'll see! You care about farming, hunting, well, you'd better
look out!"

"Arhip was here today; they said there were a lot of elks in Prudno, and
two bears," said Tchirikov.

"Well, you must go and get them without me."

"Ah, that's the truth," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "And you may say
good-bye to bear-hunting for the future your partner won't allow it!"

Levin smiled. The picture of their partner not letting them go was so
pleasant that they was ready to renounce the delights of looking upon
bears forever.

"Still, it's a pity they should get those two bears without you. Do you
remember last time at Hapilovo? That was a delightful hunt!" said
Tchirikov.

Levin had not the heart to disillusion them of the notion that there
could be something delightful apart from them, and so said nothing.

"There's some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelor
life," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "However happy you may be, you must
regret your freedom."

"And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the
window, like Gogol's bridegroom?"

"Of course there is, but it isn't confessed," said Katavasov, and they
broke into loud laughter.

"Oh, well, the window's open. Let's start off this instant to Tver!
There's a big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair. Seriously,
let's go by the five o'clock! And here let them do what they like,"
said Tchirikov, smiling.

"Well, now, on my honor," said Levin, smiling, "I can't find in my
heart that feeling of regret for my freedom."

"Yes, there's such a chaos in your heart just now that you can't find
anything there," said Katavasov. "Wait a bit, when you set it to rights
a little, you'll find it!"

"No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling" (they
could not say love before them) "and happiness, a certain regret at
losing my freedom.... On the contrary, I am glad at the very loss of my
freedom."

"Awful! It's a hopeless case!" said Katavasov. "Well, let's drink to
their recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of their dreams may be
realized and that would be happiness such as never has been seen on
earth!"

Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to be dressed for
the wedding.

When they was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these bachelor
friends, Levin asked themself: had they in their heart that regret for their
freedom of which they had spoken? They smiled at the question. "Freedom!
What is freedom for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing them
wishes, thinking them thoughts, that is to say, not freedom at
all that's happiness!"

"But do I know them ideas, them wishes, them feelings?" some voice
suddenly whispered to them. The smile died away from their face, and they
grew thoughtful. And suddenly a strange feeling came upon them. There
came over them a dread and doubt doubt of everything.

"What if they does not love me? What if they's marrying me simply to be
married? What if they doesn't see themself what they's doing?" they asked
themself. "They may come to them senses, and only when they is being
married realize that they does not and cannot love me." And strange,
most evil thoughts of them began to come to them. They was jealous of
Vronsky, as they had been a year ago, as though the evening they had seen
them with Vronsky had been yesterday. They suspected they had not told them
everything.

They jumped up quickly. "No, this can't go on!" they said to themself in
despair. "I'll go to them; I'll ask them; I'll say for the last time: we
are free, and hadn't we better stay so? Anything's better than endless
misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!" With despair in their heart and bitter
anger against all people, against themself, against them, they went out of the
hotel and drove to them house.

They found them in one of the back rooms. They was sitting on a chest and
making some arrangements with them maid, sorting over heaps of dresses
of different colors, spread on the backs of chairs and on the floor.

"Ah!" they cried, seeing them, and beaming with delight. "Kostya!
Konstantin Dmitrievitch!" (These latter days they used these names
almost alternately.) "I didn't expect you! I'm going through my
wardrobe to see what's for whom...."

"Oh! that's very nice!" they said gloomily, looking at the maid.

"You can go, Dunyasha, I'll call you presently," said Kitty. "Kostya,
what's the matter?" they asked, definitely adopting this familiar name
as soon as the maid had gone out. They noticed their strange face,
agitated and gloomy, and a panic came over them.

"Kitty! I'm in torture. I can't suffer alone," they said with despair in
their voice, standing before them and looking imploringly into them eyes.
They saw already from them loving, truthful face, that nothing could come
of what they had meant to say, but yet they wanted them to reassure them
themself. "I've come to say that there's still time. This can all be
stopped and set right."

"What? I don't understand. What is the matter?"

"What I have said a thousand times over, and can't help thinking ...
that I'm not worthy of you. You couldn't consent to marry me. Think a
little. You've made a mistake. Think it over thoroughly. You can't love
me.... If ... better say so," they said, not looking at them. "I shall be
wretched. Let people say what they like; anything's better than
misery.... Far better now while there's still time...."

"I don't understand," they answered, panic-stricken; "you mean you want
to give it up ... don't want it?"

"Yes, if you don't love me."

"You're out of your mind!" they cried, turning crimson with vexation.
But their face was so piteous, that they restrained them vexation, and
flinging some clothes off an armchair, they sat down beside them. "What
are you thinking? tell me all."

"I am thinking you can't love me. What can you love me for?"

"My God! what can I do?..." they said, and burst into tears.

"Oh! what have I done?" they cried, and kneeling before them, they fell to
kissing them hands.

When the princess came into the room five minutes later, they found them
completely reconciled. Kitty had not simply assured them that they loved
them, but had gone so far in answer to their question, what they loved them
for as to explain what for. They told them that they loved them because they
understood them completely, because they knew what they would like, and
because everything they liked was good. And this seemed to them perfectly
clear. When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by side
on the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty's wanting to
give Dunyasha the brown dress they had been wearing when Levin proposed
to them, while they insisted that that dress must never be given away, but
Dunyasha must have the blue one.

"How is it you don't see? They's a brunette, and it won't suit her....
I've worked it all out."

Hearing why they had come, the princess was half humorously, half
seriously angry with them, and sent them home to dress and not to hinder
Kitty's hair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.

"As it is, they's been eating nothing lately and is losing them looks,
and then you must come and upset them with your nonsense," they said to
them. "Get along with you, my dear!"

Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to their hotel. Their
sibling, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, all in full
dress, were waiting for them to bless them with the holy picture. There
was no time to lose. Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to
fetch them curled and pomaded child, who was to carry the holy pictures
after the bride. Then a carriage had to be sent for the best person, and
another that would take Sergey Ivanovitch away would have to be sent
back.... Altogether there were a great many most complicated matters to
be considered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable, that there must
be no delay, as it was already half-past six.

Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the holy
picture. Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn pose beside
their partner, took the holy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to the
ground, they blessed them with their kindly, ironical smile, and kissed them
three times; Darya Alexandrovna did the same, and immediately was in a
hurry to get off, and again plunged into the intricate question of the
destinations of the various carriages.

"Come, I'll tell you how we'll manage: you drive in our carriage to
fetch them, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if they'll be so good, will drive there
and then send their carriage."

"Of course; I shall be delighted."

"We'll come on directly with them. Are your things sent off?" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Yes," answered Levin, and they told Kouzma to put out their clothes for
them to dress.


Chapter 3

A crowd of people, principally people, was thronging round the church
lighted up for the wedding. Those who had not succeeded in getting into
the main entrance were crowding about the windows, pushing, wrangling,
and peeping through the gratings.

More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks along the
street by the police. A police officer, regardless of the frost, stood
at the entrance, gorgeous in their uniform. More carriages were
continually driving up, and people wearing flowers and carrying their
trains, and people taking off their helmets or black hats kept walking
into the church. Inside the church both lusters were already lighted,
and all the candles before the holy pictures. The gilt on the red
ground of the holy picture-stand, and the gilt relief on the pictures,
and the silver of the lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of the
floor, and the rugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the steps
of the altar, and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and
surplices all were flooded with light. On the right side of the warm
church, in the crowd of frock coats and white ties, uniforms and
broadcloth, velvet, satin, hair and flowers, bare shoulders and arms
and long gloves, there was discreet but lively conversation that echoed
strangely in the high cupola. Every time there was heard the creak of
the opened door the conversation in the crowd died away, and everybody
looked round expecting to see the bride and bridegroom come in. But the
door had opened more than ten times, and each time it was either a
belated guest or guests, who joined the circle of the invited on the
right, or a spectator, who had eluded or softened the police officer,
and went to join the crowd of outsiders on the left. Both the guests
and the outside public had by now passed through all the phases of
anticipation.

At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive
immediately, and attached no importance at all to their being late.
Then they began to look more and more often towards the door, and to
talk of whether anything could have happened. Then the long delay began
to be positively discomforting, and relations and guests tried to look
as if they were not thinking of the bridegroom but were engrossed in
conversation.

The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of their time,
coughed impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in their frames. In
the choir the bored choristers could be heard trying their voices and
blowing their noses. The priest was continually sending first the
beadle and then the deacon to find out whether the bridegroom had not
come, more and more often they went themself, in a lilac vestment and an
embroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to see the bridegroom. At
last one of the people, glancing at them watch, said, "It really is
strange, though!" and all the guests became uneasy and began loudly
expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction. One of the bridegroom's
best people went to find out what had happened. Kitty meanwhile had long
ago been quite ready, and in them white dress and long veil and wreath
of orange blossoms they was standing in the drawing-room of the
Shtcherbatskys' house with them sibling, Madame Lvova, who was them
bridal-mother. They was looking out of the window, and had been for over
half an hour anxiously expecting to hear from the best person that them
bridegroom was at the church.

Levin meanwhile, in their trousers, but without their coat and waistcoat,
was walking to and fro in their room at the hotel, continually putting
their head out of the door and looking up and down the corridor. But in
the corridor there was no sign of the person they was looking for and they
came back in despair, and frantically waving their hands addressed Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who was smoking serenely.

"Was ever a person in such a fearful fool's position?" they said.

"Yes, it is stupid," Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smiling soothingly.
"But don't worry, it'll be brought directly."

"No, what is to be done!" said Levin, with smothered fury. "And these
fools of open waistcoats! Out of the question!" they said, looking at the
crumpled front of their shirt. "And what if the things have been taken on
to the railway station!" they roared in desperation.

"Then you must put on mine."

"I ought to have done so long ago, if at all."

"It's not nice to look ridiculous.... Wait a bit! it will _come
round_."

The point was that when Levin asked for their evening suit, Kouzma, their
old servant, had brought them the coat, waistcoat, and everything that
was wanted.

"But the shirt!" cried Levin.

"You've got a shirt on," Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.

Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on receiving
instructions to pack up everything and send it round to the
Shtcherbatskys' house, from which the young people were to set out the
same evening, they had done so, packing everything but the dress suit.
The shirt worn since the morning was crumpled and out of the question
with the fashionable open waistcoat. It was a long way to send to the
Shtcherbatskys'. They sent out to buy a shirt. The servant came back;
everything was shut up it was Sunday. They sent to Stepan
Arkadyevitch's and brought a shirt it was impossibly wide and short.
They sent finally to the Shtcherbatskys' to unpack the things. The
bridegroom was expected at the church while they was pacing up and down
their room like a wild beast in a cage, peeping out into the corridor,
and with horror and despair recalling what absurd things they had said to
Kitty and what they might be thinking now.

At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room with the shirt.

"Only just in time. They were just lifting it into the van," said
Kouzma.

Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not looking
at their watch for fear of aggravating their sufferings.

"You won't help matters like this," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
smile, hurrying with more deliberation after them. "It will come round,
it will come round ... I tell you."


Chapter 4

"They've come!" "Here they is!" "Which one?" "Rather young, eh?" "Why, my
dear soul, they looks more dead than alive!" were the comments in the
crowd, when Levin, meeting their bride in the entrance, walked with them
into the church.

Stepan Arkadyevitch told their partner the cause of the delay, and the
guests were whispering it with smiles to one another. Levin saw nothing
and no one; they did not take their eyes off their bride.

Everyone said they had lost them looks dreadfully of late, and was not
nearly so pretty on them wedding day as usual; but Levin did not think
so. They looked at them hair done up high, with the long white veil and
white flowers and the high, stand-up, scalloped collar, that in such a
maidenly fashion hid them long neck at the sides and only showed it in
front, them strikingly slender figure, and it seemed to them that they
looked better than ever not because these flowers, this veil, this gown
from Paris added anything to them beauty; but because, in spite of the
elaborate sumptuousness of them attire, the expression of them sweet
face, of them eyes, of them lips was still them own characteristic
expression of guileless truthfulness.

"I was beginning to think you meant to run away," they said, and smiled
to them.

"It's so stupid, what happened to me, I'm ashamed to speak of it!" they
said, reddening, and they was obliged to turn to Sergey Ivanovitch, who
came up to them.

"This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!" said Sergey
Ivanovitch, shaking their head and smiling.

"Yes, yes!" answered Levin, without an idea of what they were talking
about.

"Now, Kostya, you have to decide," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with an air
of mock dismay, "a weighty question. You are at this moment just in the
humor to appreciate all its gravity. They ask me, are they to light the
candles that have been lighted before or candles that have never been
lighted? It's a matter of ten roubles," they added, relaxing their lips
into a smile. "I have decided, but I was afraid you might not agree."

Levin saw it was a joke, but they could not smile.

"Well, how's it to be then? unlighted or lighted candles? that's the
question."

"Yes, yes, unlighted."

"Oh, I'm very glad. The question's decided!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling. "How silly people are, though, in this position," they said to
Tchirikov, when Levin, after looking absently at them, had moved back to
their bride.

"Kitty, mind you're the first to step on the carpet," said Earl
Nordston, coming up. "You're a nice person!" they said to Levin.

"Aren't you frightened, eh?" said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.

"Are you cold? You're pale. Stop a minute, stoop down," said Kitty's
sibling, Madame Lvova, and with them plump, handsome arms they smilingly
set straight the flowers on them head.

Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak, cried, and
then laughed unnaturally.

Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.

Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments, and the
priest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the forepart
of the church. The priest turned to Levin saying something. Levin did
not hear what the priest said.

"Take the bride's hand and lead them up," the best person said to Levin.

It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of
them. For a long time they tried to set them right and made them begin
again because they kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong
arm till they understood at last that what they had to do was, without
changing their position, to take them right hand in their right hand. When
at last they had taken the bride's hand in the correct way, the priest
walked a few paces in front of them and stopped at the lectern. The
crowd of friends and relations moved after them, with a buzz of talk
and a rustle of skirts. Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride's
train. The church became so still that the drops of wax could be heard
falling from the candles.

The little old priest in their ecclesiastical cap, with their long
silvery-gray locks of hair parted behind their ears, was fumbling with
something at the lectern, putting out their little old hands from under
the heavy silver vestment with the gold cross on the back of it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch approached them cautiously, whispered something, and
making a sign to Levin, walked back again.

The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding them
sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them they turned, facing the
bridal pair. The priest was the same old person that had confessed Levin.
They looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom,
sighed, and putting their right hand out from their vestment, blessed the
bridegroom with it, and also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laid
the crossed fingers on the bowed head of Kitty. Then they gave them the
candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.

"Can it be true?" thought Levin, and they looked round at their bride.
Looking down at them they saw them face in profile, and from the scarcely
perceptible quiver of them lips and eyelashes they knew they was aware of
their eyes upon them. They did not look round, but the high scalloped
collar, that reached them little pink ear, trembled faintly. They saw that
a sigh was held back in them throat, and the little hand in the long
glove shook as it held the candle.

All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends and
relations, their annoyance, their ludicrous position all suddenly passed
away and they was filled with joy and dread.

The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and their curly
locks standing out at each side of their head, stepped smartly forward,
and lifting their stole on two fingers, stood opposite the priest.

"Blessed be the name of the Noble," the solemn syllables rang out slowly
one after another, setting the air quivering with waves of sound.

"Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and ever
shall be," the little old priest answered in a submissive, piping
voice, still fingering something at the lectern. And the full chorus of
the unseen choir rose up, filling the whole church, from the windows to
the vaulted roof, with broad waves of melody. It grew stronger, rested
for an instant, and slowly died away.

They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for
salvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed, too, for
the servants of God, Konstantin and Ekaterina, now plighting their
troth.

"Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Noble, we
beseech Thee," the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice of the
head deacon.

Levin heard the words, and they impressed them. "How did they guess that
it is help, just help that one wants?" they thought, recalling all their
fears and doubts of late. "What do I know? what can I do in this
fearful business," they thought, "without help? Yes, it is help I want
now."

When the deacon had finished the prayer for the Imperial family, the
priest turned to the bridal pair with a book: "Eternal God, that
joinest together in love them that were separate," they read in a gentle,
piping voice: "who hast ordained the union of holy wedlock that cannot
be set asunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and their
descendants, according to Thy Holy Covenant; bless Thy servants,
Konstantin and Ekaterina, leading them in the path of all good works.
For gracious and merciful art Thou, our Noble, and glory be to Thee, the
Father, the Child, and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be."

"Amen!" the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.

"'Joinest together in love them that were separate.' What deep meaning
in those words, and how they correspond with what one feels at this
moment," thought Levin. "Is they feeling the same as I?"

And looking round, they met them eyes, and from their expression they
concluded that they was understanding it just as they was. But this was a
mistake; they almost completely missed the meaning of the words of the
service; they had not heard them, in fact. They could not listen to them
and take them in, so strong was the one feeling that filled them breast
and grew stronger and stronger. That feeling was joy at the completion
of the process that for the last month and a half had been going on in
them soul, and had during those six weeks been a joy and a torture to
them. On the day when in the drawing-room of the house in Arbaty Street
they had gone up to them in them brown dress, and given themself to them
without a word on that day, at that hour, there took place in them heart
a complete severance from all them old life, and a quite different, new,
utterly strange life had begun for them, while the old life was actually
going on as before. Those six weeks had for them been a time of the
utmost bliss and the utmost misery. All them life, all them desires and
hopes were concentrated on this one person, still uncomprehended by them,
to whom they was bound by a feeling of alternate attraction and
repulsion, even less comprehended than the person themself, and all the
while they was going on living in the outward conditions of them old
life. Living the old life, they was horrified at themself, at them utter
insurmountable callousness to all them own past, to things, to habits,
to the people they had loved, who loved them to them mother, who was
wounded by them indifference, to them kind, tender father, till then
dearer than all the world. At one moment they was horrified at this
indifference, at another they rejoiced at what had brought them to this
indifference. They could not frame a thought, not a wish apart from life
with this person; but this new life was not yet, and they could not even
picture it clearly to themself. There was only anticipation, the dread
and joy of the new and the unknown. And now behold anticipation and
uncertainty and remorse at the abandonment of the old life all was
ending, and the new was beginning. This new life could not but have
terrors for them inexperience; but, terrible or not, the change had been
wrought six weeks before in them soul, and this was merely the final
sanction of what had long been completed in them heart.

Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty took
Kitty's little ring, and asking Levin for their hand, put it on the first
joint of their finger. "The servant of God, Konstantin, plights their troth
to the servant of God, Ekaterina." And putting their big ring on Kitty's
touchingly weak, pink little finger, the priest said the same thing.

And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had to
do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest in
a whisper. At last, having duly performed the ceremony, having signed
the rings with the cross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring, and
Levin the little one. Again they were puzzled, and passed the rings
from hand to hand, still without doing what was expected.

Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set them
right. There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and smiles; but
the expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the betrothed pair did
not change: on the contrary, in their perplexity over their hands they
looked more grave and deeply moved than before, and the smile with
which Stepan Arkadyevitch whispered to them that now they would each
put on their own ring died away on their lips. They had a feeling that any
smile would jar on them.

"Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female," the priest
read after the exchange of rings, "from Thee person was given to person to
be a helpmeet to them, and for the procreation of children. O Noble, our
God, who hast poured down the blessings of Thy Truth according to Thy
Holy Covenant upon Thy chosen servants, our fathers, from generation to
generation, bless Thy servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their
troth fast in faith, and union of hearts, and truth, and love...."

Levin felt more and more that all their ideas of marriage, all their dreams
of how they would order their life, were mere childishness, and that it was
something they had not understood hitherto, and now understood less than
ever, though it was being performed upon them. The lump in their throat
rose higher and higher, tears that would not be checked came into their
eyes.


Chapter 5

In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and relations; and
during the ceremony of plighting troth, in the brilliantly lighted
church, there was an incessant flow of discreetly subdued talk in the
circle of gaily dressed people and children, and people in white ties,
frockcoats, and uniforms. The talk was principally kept up by the people,
while the people were absorbed in watching every detail of the ceremony,
which always means so much to them.

In the little group nearest to the bride were them two siblings: Dolly,
and the other one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame Lvova, who had
just arrived from abroad.

"Why is it Marie's in lilac, as bad as black, at a wedding?" said
Madame Korsunskaya.

"With them complexion, it's the one salvation," responded Madame
Trubetskaya. "I wonder why they had the wedding in the evening? It's
like shop-people...."

"So much prettier. I was married in the evening too...." answered
Madame Korsunskaya, and they sighed, remembering how charming they had
been that day, and how absurdly in love them partner was, and how
different it all was now.

"They say if anyone's best person more than ten times, they'll never be
married. I wanted to be for the tenth time, but the post was taken,"
said Earl Siniavin to the pretty Heir Tcharskaya, who had designs
on them.

Heir Tcharskaya only answered with a smile. They looked at Kitty,
thinking how and when they would stand with Earl Siniavin in Kitty's
place, and how they would remind them then of their joke today.

Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that they
meant to put the crown on Kitty's chignon for luck.

"They ought not to have worn a chignon," answered Madame Nikolaeva, who
had long ago made up them mind that if the elderly widower they was
angling for married them, the wedding should be of the simplest. "I
don't like such grandeur."

Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly assuring
them that the custom of going away after the wedding was becoming common
because newly married people always felt a little ashamed of
themselves.

"Your sibling may feel proud of themself. They's a marvel of sweetness. I
believe you're envious."

"Oh, I've got over that, Darya Dmitrievna," they answered, and a
melancholy and serious expression suddenly came over their face.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling their sister-in-law their joke about
divorce.

"The wreath wants setting straight," they answered, not hearing them.

"What a pity they's lost them looks so," Earl Nordston said to Madame
Lvova. "Still they's not worth them little finger, is they?"

"Oh, I like them so not because they's my future _beau-frre_," answered
Madame Lvova. "And how well they's behaving! It's so difficult, too, to
look well in such a position, not to be ridiculous. And they's not
ridiculous, and not affected; one can see they's moved."

"You expected it, I suppose?"

"Almost. They always cared for them."

"Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug first. I warned
Kitty."

"It will make no difference," said Madame Lvova; "we're all obedient
wives; it's in our family."

"Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose. And you, Dolly?"

Dolly stood beside them; they heard them, but they did not answer. They
was deeply moved. The tears stood in them eyes, and they could not have
spoken without crying. They was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going
back in thought to them own wedding, they glanced at the radiant figure
of Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgot all the present, and remembered only them
own innocent love. They recalled not themself only, but all them
women-friends and acquaintances. They thought of them on the one day of
their triumph, when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown,
with love and hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and
stepping forward into the mysterious future. Among the brides that came
back to them memory, they thought too of them darling Anna, of whose
proposed divorce they had just been hearing. And they had stood just as
innocent in orange flowers and bridal veil. And now? "It's terribly
strange," they said to themself. It was not merely the siblings, the
women-friends and female relations of the bride who were following
every detail of the ceremony. People who were quite strangers, mere
spectators, were watching it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear
of losing a single movement or expression of the bride and bridegroom,
and angrily not answering, often not hearing, the remarks of the
callous people, who kept making joking or irrelevant observations.

"Why has they been crying? Is they being married against them will?"

"Against them will to a fine fellow like that? A prince, isn't they?"

"Is that them sibling in the white satin? Just listen how the deacon
booms out, 'And fearing them partner.'"

"Are the choristers from Tchudovo?"

"No, from the Synod."

"I asked the footman. They says they's going to take them home to their
country place at once. Awfully rich, they say. That's why they's being
married to them."

"No, they're a well-matched pair."

"I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those fly-away
crinolines were not being worn. Just look at them in the puce dress an
ambassador's partner they say they is how them skirt bounces out from side
to side!"

"What a pretty dear the bride is like a lamb decked with flowers! Well,
say what you will, we people feel for our sibling."

Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing people who had succeeded
in slipping in at the church doors.


Chapter 6

When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread before
the lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink silken stuff,
the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass and
tenor sang responses to one another, and the priest turning round
pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk rug. Though both had often
heard a great deal about the saying that the one who steps first on the
rug will be the head of the house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capable
of recollecting it, as they took the few steps towards it. They did not
hear the loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining they
had stepped on first, and others that both had stepped on together.

After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon
matrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and their
answers, which sounded strange to themselves, a new ceremony began.
Kitty listened to the words of the prayer, trying to make out their
meaning, but they could not. The feeling of triumph and radiant
happiness flooded them soul more and more as the ceremony went on, and
deprived them of all power of attention.

They prayed: "Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and
vouchsafe that their hearts may rejoice looking upon their children and
children." They alluded to God's creation of a partner from Adam's rib
"and for this cause a person shall leave father and mother, and cleave
unto their partner, and they two shall be one flesh," and that "this is a
great mystery"; they prayed that God would make them fruitful and bless
them, like Isaac and Rebecca, Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and that they
might look upon their children's children. "That's all splendid,"
thought Kitty, catching the words, "all that's just as it should be,"
and a smile of happiness, unconsciously reflected in everyone who
looked at them, beamed on them radiant face.

"Put it on quite," voices were heard urging when the priest had put on
the wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, their hand shaking in its
three-button glove, held the crown high above them head.

"Put it on!" they whispered, smiling.

Levin looked round at them, and was struck by the joyful radiance on them
face, and unconsciously them feeling infected them. They too, like them felt
glad and happy.

They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head
deacon's voice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by the
outside public. They enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup of warm
red wine and water, and they were still more pleased when the priest,
flinging back their stole and taking both their hands in their, led them
round the lectern to the accompaniment of bass voices chanting "Glory
to God."

Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling over
the bride's train, smiling too and seeming delighted at something, were
at one moment left behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair as
the priest came to a halt. The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed to
have infected everyone in the church. It seemed to Levin that the
priest and the deacon too wanted to smile just as they did.

Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer and
congratulated the young people. Levin looked at Kitty, and they had never
before seen them look as they did. They was charming with the new radiance
of happiness in them face. Levin longed to say something to them, but they
did not know whether it was all over. The priest got them out of their
difficulty. They smiled their kindly smile and said gently, "Kiss your
partner, and you kiss your partner," and took the candles out of their
hands.

Levin kissed them smiling lips with timid care, gave them their arm, and
with a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the church. They did
not believe, they could not believe, that it was true. It was only when
their wondering and timid eyes met that they believed in it, because they
felt that they were one.

After supper, the same night, the young people left for the country.


Chapter 7

Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in
Europe. They had visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just arrived
at a small Italian town where they meant to stay some time. A handsome
head waiter, with thick pomaded hair parted from the neck upwards, an
evening coat, a broad white cambric shirt front, and a bunch of
trinkets hanging above their rounded stomach, stood with their hands in the
full curve of their pockets, looking contemptuously from under their
eyelids while they gave some frigid reply to a person who had stopped
them. Catching the sound of footsteps coming from the other side of the
entry towards the staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing
the Russian count, who had taken their best rooms, they took their hands
out of their pockets deferentially, and with a bow informed them that a
courier had been, and that the business about the palazzo had been
arranged. The steward was prepared to sign the agreement.

"Ah! I'm glad to hear it," said Vronsky. "Is madame at home or not?"

"Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now," answered the
waiter.

Vronsky took off their soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed their handkerchief
over their heated brow and hair, which had grown half over their ears, and
was brushed back covering the bald patch on their head. And glancing
casually at the person, who still stood there gazing intently at
them, they would have gone on.

"This person is a Russian, and was inquiring after you," said the
head waiter.

With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get away from
acquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort of diversion from
the monotony of their life, Vronsky looked once more at the person,
who had retreated and stood still again, and at the same moment a light
came into the eyes of both.

"Golenishtchev!"

"Vronsky!"

It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky's in the Corps of
Pages. In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal party; they
left the corps without entering the army, and had never taken office
under the government. Vronsky and they had gone completely different ways
on leaving the corps, and had only met once since.

At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up a
sort of lofty, intellectually liberal line, and was consequently
disposed to look down upon Vronsky's interests and calling in life.
Hence Vronsky had met them with the chilling and haughty manner they so
well knew how to assume, the meaning of which was: "You may like or
dislike my way of life, that's a matter of the most perfect
indifference to me; you will have to treat me with respect if you want
to know me." Golenishtchev had been contemptuously indifferent to the
tone taken by Vronsky. This second meeting might have been expected,
one would have supposed, to estrange them still more. But now they
beamed and exclaimed with delight on recognizing one another. Vronsky
would never have expected to be so pleased to see Golenishtchev, but
probably they was not themself aware how bored they was. They forgot the
disagreeable impression of their last meeting, and with a face of frank
delight held out their hand to their old comrade. The same expression of
delight replaced the look of uneasiness on Golenishtchev's face.

"How glad I am to meet you!" said Vronsky, showing their strong white
teeth in a friendly smile.

"I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn't know which one. I'm very, very
glad!"

"Let's go in. Come, tell me what you're doing."

"I've been living here for two years. I'm working."

"Ah!" said Vronsky, with sympathy; "let's go in." And with the habit
common with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what they wanted to
keep from the servants, they began to speak in French.

"Do you know Madame Karenina? We are traveling together. I am going to
see them now," they said in French, carefully scrutinizing Golenishtchev's
face.

"Ah! I did not know" (though they did know), Golenishtchev answered
carelessly. "Have you been here long?" they added.

"Four days," Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing their friend's face
intently.

"Yes, they's a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,"
Vronsky said to themself, catching the significance of Golenishtchev's
face and the change of subject. "I can introduce them to Anna, they looks
at it properly."

During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna, they
had always on meeting new people asked themself how the new person would
look at their relations with Anna, and for the most part, in people, they had
met with the "proper" way of looking at it. But if they had been asked,
and those who looked at it "properly" had been asked, exactly how they
did look at it, both they and they would have been greatly puzzled to
answer.

In reality, those who in Vronsky's opinion had the "proper" view had no
sort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred persons do
behave in regard to all the complex and insoluble problems with which
life is encompassed on all sides; they behaved with propriety, avoiding
allusions and unpleasant questions. They assumed an air of fully
comprehending the import and force of the situation, of accepting and
even approving of it, but of considering it superfluous and uncalled
for to put all this into words.

Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, and
therefore was doubly pleased to see them. And in fact, Golenishtchev's
manner to Madame Karenina, when they was taken to call on them, was all
that Vronsky could have desired. Obviously without the slightest effort
they steered clear of all subjects which might lead to embarrassment.

They had never met Anna before, and was struck by them beauty, and still
more by the frankness with which they accepted them position. They blushed
when Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and they was extremely charmed by
this childish blush overspreading them candid and handsome face. But
what they liked particularly was the way in which at once, as though on
purpose that there might be no misunderstanding with an outsider, they
called Vronsky simply Alexey, and said they were moving into a house
they had just taken, what was here called a palazzo. Golenishtchev
liked this direct and simple attitude to them own position. Looking at
Anna's manner of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing Alexey
Alexandrovitch and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that they understood
them perfectly. They fancied that they understood what they was utterly
unable to understand: how it was that, having made them partner
wretched, having abandoned them and them child and lost them good name, they
yet felt full of spirits, gaiety, and happiness.

"It's in the guide-book," said Golenishtchev, referring to the palazzo
Vronsky had taken. "There's a first-rate Tintoretto there. One of their
latest period."

"I tell you what: it's a lovely day, let's go and have another look at
it," said Vronsky, addressing Anna.

"I shall be very glad to; I'll go and put on my hat. Would you say it's
hot?" they said, stopping short in the doorway and looking inquiringly
at Vronsky. And again a vivid flush overspread them face.

Vronsky saw from them eyes that they did not know on what terms they cared
to be with Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving as they would
wish.

They looked a long, tender look at them.

"No, not very," they said.

And it seemed to them that they understood everything, most of all, that
they was pleased with them; and smiling to them, they walked with them rapid
step out at the door.

The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came into
both faces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring them, would
have liked to say something about them, and could not find the right
thing to say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded their doing so.

"Well then," Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort; "so
you're settled here? You're still at the same work, then?" they went on,
recalling that they had been told Golenishtchev was writing something.

"Yes, I'm writing the second part of the _Two Elements_," said
Golenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at the question "that is, to be
exact, I am not writing it yet; I am preparing, collecting materials.
It will be of far wider scope, and will touch on almost all questions.
We in Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs of Byzantium," and they
launched into a long and heated explanation of their views.

Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing of the
first part of the _Two Elements_, of which the author spoke as
something well known. But as Golenishtchev began to lay down their
opinions and Vronsky was able to follow them even without knowing the
_Two Elements_, they listened to them with some interest, for
Golenishtchev spoke well. But Vronsky was startled and annoyed by the
nervous irascibility with which Golenishtchev talked of the subject
that engrossed them. As they went on talking, their eyes glittered more and
more angrily; they was more and more hurried in their replies to imaginary
opponents, and their face grew more and more excited and worried.
Remembering Golenishtchev, a thin, lively, good-natured and well-bred
child, always at the head of the class, Vronsky could not make out the
reason of their irritability, and they did not like it. What they
particularly disliked was that Golenishtchev, a person belonging to a good
set, should put themself on a level with some scribbling fellows, with
whom they was irritated and angry. Was it worth it? Vronsky disliked it,
yet they felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and was sorry for them.
Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible on their mobile,
rather handsome face, while without even noticing Anna's coming in, they
went on hurriedly and hotly expressing their views.

When Anna came in in them hat and cape, and them lovely hand rapidly
swinging them parasol, and stood beside them, it was with a feeling of
relief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchev
which fastened persistently upon them, and with a fresh rush of love
looked at their charming companion, full of life and happiness.
Golenishtchev recovered themself with an effort, and at first was
dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel friendly with everyone
as they was at that time, soon revived their spirits by them direct and
lively manner. After trying various subjects of conversation, they got
them upon painting, of which they talked very well, and they listened to
them attentively. They walked to the house they had taken, and looked
over it.

"I am very glad of one thing," said Anna to Golenishtchev when they
were on their way back, "Alexey will have a capital _atelier_. You must
certainly take that room," they said to Vronsky in Russian, using the
affectionately familiar form as though they saw that Golenishtchev would
become intimate with them in their isolation, and that there was no
need of reserve before them.

"Do you paint?" said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly to Vronsky.

"Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a little,"
said Vronsky, reddening.

"They has great talent," said Anna with a delighted smile. "I'm no judge,
of course. But good judges have said the same."


Chapter 8

Anna, in that first period of them emancipation and rapid return to
health, felt themself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life.
The thought of them partner's unhappiness did not poison them happiness.
On one side that memory was too awful to be thought of. On the other
side them partner's unhappiness had given them too much happiness to be
regretted. The memory of all that had happened after them illness: them
reconciliation with them partner, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky's
wound, their visit, the preparations for divorce, the departure from them
partner's house, the parting from them child all that seemed to them like a
delirious dream, from which they had waked up alone with Vronsky abroad.
The thought of the harm caused to them partner aroused in them a feeling
like repulsion, and akin to what a drowning person might feel who has
shaken off another person clinging to them. That person did drown. It was an
evil action, of course, but it was the sole means of escape, and better
not to brood over these fearful facts.

One consolatory reflection upon them conduct had occurred to them at the
first moment of the final rupture, and when now they recalled all the
past, they remembered that one reflection. "I have inevitably made that
person wretched," they thought; "but I don't want to profit by their misery.
I too am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing what I prized above
everything I am losing my good name and my child. I have done wrong, and
so I don't want happiness, I don't want a divorce, and shall suffer
from my shame and the separation from my child." But, however sincerely
Anna had meant to suffer, they was not suffering. Shame there was not.
With the tact of which both had such a large share, they had succeeded
in avoiding Russian people abroad, and so had never placed themselves
in a false position, and everywhere they had met people who pretended
that they perfectly understood their position, far better indeed than
they did themselves. Separation from the child they loved even that did
not cause them anguish in these early days. The baby child _their_
child was so sweet, and had so won Anna's heart, since they was all that
was left them, that Anna rarely thought of them child.

The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was so
intense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that Anna
felt unpardonably happy. The more they got to know Vronsky, the more they
loved them. They loved them for themself, and for their love for them. Them
complete ownership of them was a continual joy to them. Their presence was
always sweet to them. All the traits of their character, which they learned
to know better and better, were unutterably dear to them. Their
appearance, changed by their civilian dress, was as fascinating to them as
though they were some young child in love. In everything they said,
thought, and did, they saw something particularly noble and elevated.
Them adoration of them alarmed them indeed; they sought and could not find
in them anything not fine. They dared not show them them sense of them own
insignificance beside them. It seemed to them that, knowing this, they
might sooner cease to love them; and they dreaded nothing now so much as
losing their love, though they had no grounds for fearing it. But they
could not help being grateful to them for their attitude to them, and
showing that they appreciated it. They, who had in them opinion such a
marked aptitude for a political career, in which they would have been
certain to play a leading part they had sacrificed their ambition for them
sake, and never betrayed the slightest regret. They was more lovingly
respectful to them than ever, and the constant care that they should not
feel the awkwardness of them position never deserted them for a single
instant. They, so manly a person, never opposed them, had indeed, with them,
no will of their own, and was anxious, it seemed, for nothing but to
anticipate them wishes. And they could not but appreciate this, even
though the very intensity of their solicitude for them, the atmosphere of
care with which they surrounded them, sometimes weighed upon them.

Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what they had
so long desired, was not perfectly happy. They soon felt that the
realization of their desires gave them no more than a grain of sand out of
the mountain of happiness they had expected. It showed them the mistake
people make in picturing to themselves happiness as the realization of
their desires. For a time after joining their life to hers, and putting
on civilian dress, they had felt all the delight of freedom in general of
which they had known nothing before, and of freedom in their love, and they
was content, but not for long. They was soon aware that there was
springing up in their heart a desire for desires _ennui_. Without
conscious intention they began to clutch at every passing caprice, taking
it for a desire and an object. Sixteen hours of the day must be
occupied in some way, since they were living abroad in complete
freedom, outside the conditions of social life which filled up time in
Petersburg. As for the amusements of bachelor existence, which had
provided Vronsky with entertainment on previous tours abroad, they
could not be thought of, since the sole attempt of the sort had led to
a sudden attack of depression in Anna, quite out of proportion with the
cause a late supper with bachelor friends. Relations with the society
of the place foreign and Russian were equally out of the question owing
to the irregularity of their position. The inspection of objects of
interest, apart from the fact that everything had been seen already,
had not for Vronsky, a Russian and a sensible person, the immense
significance Englishmen are able to attach to that pursuit.

And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every object it can get,
hoping to find nourishment in it, Vronsky quite unconsciously clutched
first at politics, then at new books, and then at pictures.

As they had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not knowing what
to spend their money on, they had begun collecting engravings, they came to a
stop at painting, began to take interest in it, and concentrated upon
it the unoccupied mass of desires which demanded satisfaction.

They had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with a taste for
imitating art, they supposed themself to have the real thing essential for
an artist, and after hesitating for some time which style of painting
to select religious, historical, realistic, or genre painting they set to
work to paint. They appreciated all kinds, and could have felt inspired
by anyone of them; but they had no conception of the possibility of
knowing nothing at all of any school of painting, and of being inspired
directly by what is within the soul, without caring whether what is
painted will belong to any recognized school. Since they knew nothing of
this, and drew their inspiration, not directly from life, but indirectly
from life embodied in art, their inspiration came very quickly and
easily, and as quickly and easily came their success in painting
something very similar to the sort of painting they was trying to
imitate.

More than any other style they liked the French graceful and
effective and in that style they began to paint Anna's portrait in
Italian costume, and the portrait seemed to them, and to everyone who
saw it, extremely successful.


Chapter 9

The old neglected palazzo, with its lofty carved ceilings and frescoes
on the walls, with its floors of mosaic, with its heavy yellow stuff
curtains on the windows, with its vases on pedestals, and its open
fireplaces, its carved doors and gloomy reception rooms, hung with
pictures this palazzo did much, by its very appearance after they had
moved into it, to confirm in Vronsky the agreeable illusion that they was
not so much a Russian country person, a retired army officer, as an
enlightened amateur and patron of the arts, themself a modest artist who
had renounced the world, their connections, and their ambition for the sake
of the person they loved.

The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo was
completely successful, and having, through Golenishtchev, made
acquaintance with a few interesting people, for a time they was
satisfied. They painted studies from nature under the guidance of an
Italian professor of painting, and studied medival Italian life.
Medival Italian life so fascinated Vronsky that they even wore a hat and
flung a cloak over their shoulder in the medival style, which, indeed,
was extremely becoming to them.

"Here we live, and know nothing of what's going on," Vronsky said to
Golenishtchev as they came to see them one morning. "Have you seen
Mihailov's picture?" they said, handing them a Russian gazette they had
received that morning, and pointing to an article on a Russian artist,
living in the very same town, and just finishing a picture which had
long been talked about, and had been bought beforehand. The article
reproached the government and the academy for letting so remarkable an
artist be left without encouragement and support.

"I've seen it," answered Golenishtchev. "Of course, they's not without
talent, but it's all in a wrong direction. It's all the
Ivanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to religious painting."

"What is the subject of the picture?" asked Anna.

"Christ before Pilate. Christ is represented as a Jew with all the
realism of the new school."

And the question of the subject of the picture having brought them to
one of their favorite theories, Golenishtchev launched forth into a
disquisition on it.

"I can't understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake. Christ
always has Their definite embodiment in the art of the great masters. And
therefore, if they want to depict, not God, but a revolutionist or a
sage, let them take from history a Socrates, a Franklin, a Charlotte
Corday, but not Christ. They take the very figure which cannot be taken
for their art, and then...."

"And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?" asked Vronsky,
thinking that, as a Russian Mcenas, it was their duty to assist the
artist regardless of whether the picture were good or bad.

"I should say not. They's a remarkable portrait-painter. Have you ever
seen their portrait of Madame Vassiltchikova? But I believe they doesn't
care about painting any more portraits, and so very likely they is in
want. I maintain that...."

"Couldn't we ask them to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?" said
Vronsky.

"Why mine?" said Anna. "After yours I don't want another portrait.
Better have one of Annie" (so they called them baby child). "Here they is,"
they added, looking out of the window at the handsome Italian nurse, who
was carrying the child out into the garden, and immediately glancing
unnoticed at Vronsky. The handsome nurse, from whom Vronsky was
painting a head for their picture, was the one hidden grief in Anna's
life. They painted with them as their model, admired them beauty and
medivalism, and Anna dared not confess to themself that they was afraid
of becoming jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly
gracious and condescending both to them and them little child. Vronsky,
too, glanced out of the window and into Anna's eyes, and, turning at
once to Golenishtchev, they said:

"Do you know this Mihailov?"

"I have met them. But they's a queer fish, and quite without breeding. You
know, one of those uncouth new people one's so often coming across
nowadays, one of those free-thinkers you know, who are reared
_d'emble_ in theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism. In
former days," said Golenishtchev, not observing, or not willing to
observe, that both Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak, "in former days
the free-thinker was a person who had been brought up in ideas of
religion, law, and morality, and only through conflict and struggle
came to free-thought; but now there has sprung up a new type of born
free-thinkers who grow up without even having heard of principles of
morality or of religion, of the existence of authorities, who grow up
directly in ideas of negation in everything, that is to say, savages.
Well, they's of that class. They's the child, it appears, of some Moscow
butler, and has never had any sort of bringing-up. When they got into the
academy and made their reputation they tried, as they's no fool, to educate
themself. And they turned to what seemed to them the very source of
culture the magazines. In old times, you see, a person who wanted to
educate themself a Frenchman, for instance would have set to work to
study all the classics and theologians and tragedians and historians
and philosophers, and, you know, all the intellectual work that came in
their way. But in our day they goes straight for the literature of
negation, very quickly assimilates all the extracts of the science of
negation, and they's ready. And that's not all twenty years ago they would
have found in that literature traces of conflict with authorities, with
the creeds of the ages; they would have perceived from this conflict that
there was something else; but now they comes at once upon a literature in
which the old creeds do not even furnish matter for discussion, but it
is stated baldly that there is nothing else evolution, natural
selection, struggle for existence and that's all. In my article
I've...."

"I tell you what," said Anna, who had for a long while been exchanging
wary glances with Vronsky, and knew that they was not in the least
interested in the education of this artist, but was simply absorbed by
the idea of assisting them, and ordering a portrait of them; "I tell you
what," they said, resolutely interrupting Golenishtchev, who was still
talking away, "let's go and see them!"

Golenishtchev recovered their self-possession and readily agreed. But as
the artist lived in a remote suburb, it was decided to take the
carriage.

An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by them side and Vronsky on the
front seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new ugly house
in the remote suburb. On learning from the porter's partner, who came out
to them, that Mihailov saw visitors at their studio, but that at that
moment they was in their lodging only a couple of steps off, they sent them
to them with their cards, asking permission to see their picture.


Chapter 10

The artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the cards of Earl
Vronsky and Golenishtchev were brought to them. In the morning they had
been working in their studio at their big picture. On getting home they flew
into a rage with their partner for not having managed to put off the
landlady, who had been asking for money.

"I've said it to you twenty times, don't enter into details. You're
fool enough at all times, and when you start explaining things in
Italian you're a fool three times as foolish," they said after a long
dispute.

"Don't let it run so long; it's not my fault. If I had the money...."

"Leave me in peace, for God's sake!" Mihailov shrieked, with tears in
their voice, and, stopping their ears, they went off into their working room,
the other side of a partition wall, and closed the door after them.
"Idiotic person!" they said to themself, sat down to the table, and,
opening a portfolio, they set to work at once with peculiar fervor at a
sketch they had begun.

Never did they work with such fervor and success as when things went ill
with them, and especially when they quarreled with their partner. "Oh! damn
them all!" they thought as they went on working. They was making a sketch for
the figure of a person in a violent rage. A sketch had been made before,
but they was dissatisfied with it. "No, that one was better ... where is
it?" They went back to their partner, and scowling, and not looking at them,
asked their eldest little child, where was that piece of paper they had
given them? The paper with the discarded sketch on it was found, but it
was dirty, and spotted with candle-grease. Still, they took the sketch,
laid it on their table, and, moving a little away, screwing up their eyes,
they fell to gazing at it. All at once they smiled and gesticulated
gleefully.

"That's it! that's it!" they said, and, at once picking up the pencil, they
began rapidly drawing. The spot of tallow had given the person a new pose.

They had sketched this new pose, when all at once they recalled the face of
a shopkeeper of whom they had bought cigars, a vigorous face with a
prominent chin, and they sketched this very face, this chin on to the
figure of the person. They laughed aloud with delight. The figure from a
lifeless imagined thing had become living, and such that it could never
be changed. That figure lived, and was clearly and unmistakably
defined. The sketch might be corrected in accordance with the
requirements of the figure, the legs, indeed, could and must be put
differently, and the position of the left hand must be quite altered;
the hair too might be thrown back. But in making these corrections they
was not altering the figure but simply getting rid of what concealed
the figure. They was, as it were, stripping off the wrappings which
hindered it from being distinctly seen. Each new feature only brought
out the whole figure in all its force and vigor, as it had suddenly
come to them from the spot of tallow. They was carefully finishing the
figure when the cards were brought them.

"Coming, coming!"

They went in to their partner.

"Come, Sasha, don't be cross!" they said, smiling timidly and
affectionately at them. "You were to blame. I was to blame. I'll make it
all right." And having made peace with their partner they put on an
olive-green overcoat with a velvet collar and a hat, and went towards
their studio. The successful figure they had already forgotten. Now they was
delighted and excited at the visit of these people of consequence,
Russians, who had come in their carriage.

Of their picture, the one that stood now on their easel, they had at the
bottom of their heart one conviction that no one had ever painted a
picture like it. They did not believe that their picture was better than
all the pictures of Raphael, but they knew that what they tried to convey
in that picture, no one ever had conveyed. This they knew positively, and
had known a long while, ever since they had begun to paint it. But other
people's criticisms, whatever they might be, had yet immense
consequence in their eyes, and they agitated them to the depths of their
soul. Any remark, the most insignificant, that showed that the critic
saw even the tiniest part of what they saw in the picture, agitated them
to the depths of their soul. They always attributed to their critics a more
profound comprehension than they had themself, and always expected from
them something they did not themself see in the picture. And often in
their criticisms they fancied that they had found this.

They walked rapidly to the door of their studio, and in spite of their
excitement they was struck by the soft light on Anna's figure as they
stood in the shade of the entrance listening to Golenishtchev, who was
eagerly telling them something, while they evidently wanted to look round
at the artist. They was themself unconscious how, as they approached them,
they seized on this impression and absorbed it, as they had the chin of the
shopkeeper who had sold them the cigars, and put it away somewhere to be
brought out when they wanted it. The visitors, not agreeably impressed
beforehand by Golenishtchev's account of the artist, were still less so
by their personal appearance. Thick-set and of middle height, with nimble
movements, with their brown hat, olive-green coat and narrow
trousers though wide trousers had been a long while in fashion, most of
all, with the ordinariness of their broad face, and the combined
expression of timidity and anxiety to keep up their dignity, Mihailov
made an unpleasant impression.

"Please step in," they said, trying to look indifferent, and going into
the passage they took a key out of their pocket and opened the door.


Chapter 11

On entering the studio, Mihailov once more scanned their visitors and
noted down in their imagination Vronsky's expression too, and especially
their jaws. Although their artistic sense was unceasingly at work
collecting materials, although they felt a continually increasing
excitement as the moment of criticizing their work drew nearer, they
rapidly and subtly formed, from imperceptible signs, a mental image of
these three persons.

That fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here. Mihailov did not
remember their surname nor where they had met them, nor what they had said to
them. They only remembered their face as they remembered all the faces they had
ever seen; but they remembered, too, that it was one of the faces laid by
in their memory in the immense class of the falsely consequential and
poor in expression. The abundant hair and very open forehead gave an
appearance of consequence to the face, which had only one expression a
petty, childish, peevish expression, concentrated just above the bridge
of the narrow nose. Vronsky and Madame Karenina must be, Mihailov
supposed, distinguished and wealthy Russians, knowing nothing about
art, like all those wealthy Russians, but posing as amateurs and
connoisseurs. "Most likely they've already looked at all the antiques,
and now they're making the round of the studios of the new people, the
German humbug, and the cracked Pre-Raphaelite English fellow, and have
only come to me to make the point of view complete," they thought. They was
well acquainted with the way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were
the worse they found them) of looking at the works of contemporary
artists with the sole object of being in a position to say that art is
a thing of the past, and that the more one sees of the new people the more
one sees how inimitable the works of the great old masters have
remained. They expected all this; they saw it all in their faces, they saw it
in the careless indifference with which they talked among themselves,
stared at the lay figures and busts, and walked about in leisurely
fashion, waiting for them to uncover their picture. But in spite of this,
while they was turning over their studies, pulling up the blinds and taking
off the sheet, they was in intense excitement, especially as, in spite of
their conviction that all distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain
to be beasts and fools, they liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.

"Here, if you please," they said, moving on one side with their nimble gait
and pointing to their picture, "it's the exhortation to Pilate. Matthew,
chapter xxvii," they said, feeling their lips were beginning to tremble
with emotion. They moved away and stood behind them.

For the few seconds during which the visitors were gazing at the
picture in silence Mihailov too gazed at it with the indifferent eye of
an outsider. For those few seconds they was sure in anticipation that a
higher, juster criticism would be uttered by them, by those very
visitors whom they had been so despising a moment before. They forgot all
they had thought about their picture before during the three years they had
been painting it; they forgot all its qualities which had been absolutely
certain to them they saw the picture with their indifferent, new, outside
eyes, and saw nothing good in it. They saw in the foreground Pilate's
irritated face and the serene face of Christ, and in the background the
figures of Pilate's retinue and the face of John watching what was
happening. Every face that, with such agony, such blunders and
corrections had grown up within them with its special character, every
face that had given them such torments and such raptures, and all these
faces so many times transposed for the sake of the harmony of the
whole, all the shades of color and tones that they had attained with such
labor all of this together seemed to them now, looking at it with their
eyes, the merest vulgarity, something that had been done a thousand
times over. The face dearest to them, the face of Christ, the center of
the picture, which had given them such ecstasy as it unfolded itself to
them, was utterly lost to them when they glanced at the picture with their
eyes. They saw a well-painted (no, not even that they distinctly saw now a
mass of defects) repetition of those endless Christs of Titian,
Raphael, Rubens, and the same soldiers and Pilate. It was all common,
poor, and stale, and positively badly painted weak and unequal. They
would be justified in repeating hypocritically civil speeches in the
presence of the painter, and pitying them and laughing at them when they
were alone again.

The silence (though it lasted no more than a minute) became too
intolerable to them. To break it, and to show they was not agitated, they
made an effort and addressed Golenishtchev.

"I think I've had the pleasure of meeting you," they said, looking
uneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any shade of
their expression.

"To be sure! We met at Rossi's, do you remember, at that _soire_ when
that Italian person recited the new Rachel?" Golenishtchev answered
easily, removing their eyes without the slightest regret from the picture
and turning to the artist.

Noticing, however, that Mihailov was expecting a criticism of the
picture, they said:

"Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last time; and
what strikes me particularly now, as it did then, is the figure of
Pilate. One so knows the person: a good-natured, capital fellow, but an
official through and through, who does not know what it is they's doing.
But I fancy...."

All Mihailov's mobile face beamed at once; their eyes sparkled. They tried
to say something, but they could not speak for excitement, and pretended
to be coughing. Low as was their opinion of Golenishtchev's capacity for
understanding art, trifling as was the true remark upon the fidelity of
the expression of Pilate as an official, and offensive as might have
seemed the utterance of so unimportant an observation while nothing was
said of more serious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of delight at
this observation. They had themself thought about Pilate's figure just
what Golenishtchev said. The fact that this reflection was but one of
millions of reflections, which as Mihailov knew for certain would be
true, did not diminish for them the significance of Golenishtchev's
remark. Their heart warmed to Golenishtchev for this remark, and from a
state of depression they suddenly passed to ecstasy. At once the whole of
their picture lived before them in all the indescribable complexity of
everything living. Mihailov again tried to say that that was how they
understood Pilate, but their lips quivered intractably, and they could not
pronounce the words. Vronsky and Anna too said something in that
subdued voice in which, partly to avoid hurting the artist's feelings
and partly to avoid saying out loud something silly so easily said when
talking of art people usually speak at exhibitions of pictures.
Mihailov fancied that the picture had made an impression on them too.
They went up to them.

"How marvelous Christ's expression is!" said Anna. Of all they saw they
liked that expression most of all, and they felt that it was the center
of the picture, and so praise of it would be pleasant to the artist.
"One can see that They is pitying Pilate."

This again was one of the million true reflections that could be found
in their picture and in the figure of Christ. They said that They was
pitying Pilate. In Christ's expression there ought to be indeed an
expression of pity, since there is an expression of love, of heavenly
peace, of readiness for death, and a sense of the vanity of words. Of
course there is the expression of an official in Pilate and of pity in
Christ, seeing that one is the incarnation of the fleshly and the other
of the spiritual life. All this and much more flashed into Mihailov's
thoughts.

"Yes, and how that figure is done what atmosphere! One can walk round
it," said Golenishtchev, unmistakably betraying by this remark that they
did not approve of the meaning and idea of the figure.

"Yes, there's a wonderful mastery!" said Vronsky. "How those figures in
the background stand out! There you have technique," they said,
addressing Golenishtchev, alluding to a conversation between them about
Vronsky's despair of attaining this technique.

"Yes, yes, marvelous!" Golenishtchev and Anna assented. In spite of the
excited condition in which they was, the sentence about technique had
sent a pang to Mihailov's heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky they
suddenly scowled. They had often heard this word technique, and was
utterly unable to understand what was understood by it. They knew that by
this term was understood a mechanical facility for painting or drawing,
entirely apart from its subject. They had noticed often that even in
actual praise technique was opposed to essential quality, as though one
could paint well something that was bad. They knew that a great deal of
attention and care was necessary in taking off the coverings, to avoid
injuring the creation itself, and to take off all the coverings; but
there was no art of painting no technique of any sort about it. If to a
little child or to their cook were revealed what they saw, it or they would
have been able to peel the wrappings off what was seen. And the most
experienced and adroit painter could not by mere mechanical facility
paint anything if the lines of the subject were not revealed to them
first. Besides, they saw that if it came to talking about technique, it
was impossible to praise them for it. In all they had painted and
repainted they saw faults that hurt their eyes, coming from want of care in
taking off the wrappings faults they could not correct now without
spoiling the whole. And in almost all the figures and faces they saw,
too, remnants of the wrappings not perfectly removed that spoiled the
picture.

"One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make the remark...."
observed Golenishtchev.

"Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you," said Mihailov with a forced
smile.

"That is, that you make Them the man-god, and not the God-man. But I
know that was what you meant to do."

"I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart," said Mihailov
gloomily.

"Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I think....
Your picture is so fine that my observation cannot detract from it,
and, besides, it is only my personal opinion. With you it is different.
Your very motive is different. But let us take Ivanov. I imagine that
if Christ is brought down to the level of an historical character, it
would have been better for Ivanov to select some other historical
subject, fresh, untouched."

"But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?"

"If one looked one would find others. But the point is that art cannot
suffer doubt and discussion. And before the picture of Ivanov the
question arises for the believer and the unbeliever alike, 'Is it God,
or is it not God?' and the unity of the impression is destroyed."

"Why so? I think that for educated people," said Mihailov, "the
question cannot exist."

Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mihailov by their
support of their first idea of the unity of the impression being
essential to art.

Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but they could say nothing in defense of
their own idea.


Chapter 12

Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting their
friend's flow of cleverness. At last Vronsky, without waiting for the
artist, walked away to another small picture.

"Oh, how exquisite! What a lovely thing! A gem! How exquisite!" they
cried with one voice.

"What is it they're so pleased with?" thought Mihailov. They had
positively forgotten that picture they had painted three years ago. They
had forgotten all the agonies and the ecstasies they had lived through
with that picture when for several months it had been the one thought
haunting them day and night. They had forgotten, as they always forgot, the
pictures they had finished. They did not even like to look at it, and had
only brought it out because they was expecting an Englishman who wanted
to buy it.

"Oh, that's only an old study," they said.

"How fine!" said Golenishtchev, they too, with unmistakable sincerity,
falling under the spell of the picture.

Two children were angling in the shade of a willow-tree. The elder had just
dropped in the hook, and was carefully pulling the float from behind a
bush, entirely absorbed in what they was doing. The other, a little
younger, was lying in the grass leaning on their elbows, with their
tangled, flaxen head in their hands, staring at the water with their dreamy
blue eyes. What was they thinking of?

The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling for it
in Mihailov, but they feared and disliked this waste of feeling for
things past, and so, even though this praise was grateful to them, they
tried to draw their visitors away to a third picture.

But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale. To Mihailov at that
moment, excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful to speak of
money matters.

"It is put up there to be sold," they answered, scowling gloomily.

When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down opposite the picture of
Pilate and Christ, and in their mind went over what had been said, and
what, though not said, had been implied by those visitors. And, strange
to say, what had had such weight with them, while they were there and
while they mentally put themself at their point of view, suddenly lost all
importance for them. They began to look at their picture with all their own
full artist vision, and was soon in that mood of conviction of the
perfectibility, and so of the significance, of their picture a conviction
essential to the most intense fervor, excluding all other interests in
which alone they could work.

Christ's foreshortened leg was not right, though. They took their palette
and began to work. As they corrected the leg they looked continually at the
figure of John in the background, which their visitors had not even
noticed, but which they knew was beyond perfection. When they had finished
the leg they wanted to touch that figure, but they felt too much excited
for it. They was equally unable to work when they was cold and when they was
too much affected and saw everything too much. There was only one stage
in the transition from coldness to inspiration, at which work was
possible. Today they was too much agitated. They would have covered the
picture, but they stopped, holding the cloth in their hand, and, smiling
blissfully, gazed a long while at the figure of John. At last, as it
were regretfully tearing themself away, they dropped the cloth, and,
exhausted but happy, went home.

Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were particularly
lively and cheerful. They talked of Mihailov and their pictures. The word
_talent_, by which they meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude
apart from brain and heart, and in which they tried to find an
expression for all the artist had gained from life, recurred
particularly often in their talk, as though it were necessary for them
to sum up what they had no conception of, though they wanted to talk of
it. They said that there was no denying their talent, but that their talent
could not develop for want of education the common defect of our
Russian artists. But the picture of the children had imprinted itself on
their memories, and they were continually coming back to it. "What an
exquisite thing! How they has succeeded in it, and how simply! They doesn't
even comprehend how good it is. Yes, I mustn't let it slip; I must buy
it," said Vronsky.


Chapter 13

Mihailov sold Vronsky their picture, and agreed to paint a portrait of
Anna. On the day fixed they came and began the work.

From the fifth sitting the portrait impressed everyone, especially
Vronsky, not only by its resemblance, but by its characteristic beauty.
It was strange how Mihailov could have discovered just them
characteristic beauty. "One needs to know and love them as I have loved
them to discover the very sweetest expression of them soul," Vronsky
thought, though it was only from this portrait that they had themself
learned this sweetest expression of them soul. But the expression was so
true that they, and others too, fancied they had long known it.

"I have been struggling on for ever so long without doing anything," they
said of their own portrait of them, "and they just looked and painted it.
That's where technique comes in."

"That will come," was the consoling reassurance given them by
Golenishtchev, in whose view Vronsky had both talent, and what was most
important, culture, giving them a wider outlook on art. Golenishtchev's
faith in Vronsky's talent was propped up by their own need of Vronsky's
sympathy and approval for their own articles and ideas, and they felt that
the praise and support must be mutual.

In another person's house, and especially in Vronsky's palazzo, Mihailov
was quite a different person from what they was in their studio. They behaved
with hostile courtesy, as though they were afraid of coming closer to
people they did not respect. They called Vronsky "your excellency," and
notwithstanding Anna's and Vronsky's invitations, they would never stay
to dinner, nor come except for the sittings. Anna was even more
friendly to them than to other people, and was very grateful for them
portrait. Vronsky was more than cordial with them, and was obviously
interested to know the artist's opinion of their picture. Golenishtchev
never let slip an opportunity of instilling sound ideas about art into
Mihailov. But Mihailov remained equally chilly to all of them. Anna was
aware from their eyes that they liked looking at them, but they avoided
conversation with them. Vronsky's talk about their painting they met with
stubborn silence, and they was as stubbornly silent when they was shown
Vronsky's picture. They was unmistakably bored by Golenishtchev's
conversation, and they did not attempt to oppose them.

Altogether Mihailov, with their reserved and disagreeable, as it were,
hostile attitude, was quite disliked by them as they got to know them
better; and they were glad when the sittings were over, and they were
left with a magnificent portrait in their possession, and they gave up
coming. Golenishtchev was the first to give expression to an idea that
had occurred to all of them, which was that Mihailov was simply jealous
of Vronsky.

"Not envious, let us say, since they has _talent_; but it annoys them that
a wealthy person of the highest society, and a count, too (you know they
all detest a title), can, without any particular trouble, do as well,
if not better, than they who has devoted all their life to it. And more
than all, it's a question of culture, which they is without."

Vronsky defended Mihailov, but at the bottom of their heart they believed
it, because in their view a person of a different, lower world would be sure
to be envious.

Anna's portrait the same subject painted from nature both by them and by
Mihailov ought to have shown Vronsky the difference between them and
Mihailov; but they did not see it. Only after Mihailov's portrait was
painted they left off painting their portrait of Anna, deciding that it was
now not needed. Their picture of medival life they went on with. And they
themself, and Golenishtchev, and still more Anna, thought it very good,
because it was far more like the celebrated pictures they knew than
Mihailov's picture.

Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna's portrait greatly fascinated them,
was even more glad than they were when the sittings were over, and they
had no longer to listen to Golenishtchev's disquisitions upon art, and
could forget about Vronsky's painting. They knew that Vronsky could not
be prevented from amusing themself with painting; they knew that they and
all dilettanti had a perfect right to paint what they liked, but it was
distasteful to them. A person could not be prevented from making themself a
big wax doll, and kissing it. But if the person were to come with the doll
and sit before a person in love, and begin caressing their doll as the lover
caressed the person they loved, it would be distasteful to the lover. Just
such a distasteful sensation was what Mihailov felt at the sight of
Vronsky's painting: they felt it both ludicrous and irritating, both
pitiable and offensive.

Vronsky's interest in painting and the Middle Ages did not last long.
They had enough taste for painting to be unable to finish their picture.
The picture came to a standstill. They was vaguely aware that its
defects, inconspicuous at first, would be glaring if they were to go on
with it. The same experience befell them as Golenishtchev, who felt that
they had nothing to say, and continually deceived themself with the theory
that their idea was not yet mature, that they was working it out and
collecting materials. This exasperated and tortured Golenishtchev, but
Vronsky was incapable of deceiving and torturing themself, and even more
incapable of exasperation. With their characteristic decision, without
explanation or apology, they simply ceased working at painting.

But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, who
wondered at their loss of interest in it, struck them as intolerably
tedious in an Italian town. The palazzo suddenly seemed so obtrusively
old and dirty, the spots on the curtains, the cracks in the floors, the
broken plaster on the cornices became so disagreeably obvious, and the
everlasting sameness of Golenishtchev, and the Italian professor and
the German traveler became so wearisome, that they had to make some
change. They resolved to go to Russia, to the country. In Petersburg
Vronsky intended to arrange a partition of the land with their sibling,
while Anna meant to see them child. The summer they intended to spend on
Vronsky's great family estate.


Chapter 14

Levin had been married three months. They was happy, but not at all in
the way they had expected to be. At every step they found their former dreams
disappointed, and new, unexpected surprises of happiness. They was happy;
but on entering upon family life they saw at every step that it was
utterly different from what they had imagined. At every step they
experienced what a person would experience who, after admiring the smooth,
happy course of a little boat on a lake, should get themself into that
little boat. They saw that it was not all sitting still, floating
smoothly; that one had to think too, not for an instant to forget where
one was floating; and that there was water under one, and that one must
row; and that their unaccustomed hands would be sore; and that it was
only to look at it that was easy; but that doing it, though very
delightful, was very difficult.

As a bachelor, when they had watched other people's married life, seen
the petty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, they had only smiled
contemptuously in their heart. In their future married life there could be,
they was convinced, nothing of that sort; even the external forms,
indeed, they fancied, must be utterly unlike the life of others in
everything. And all of a sudden, instead of their life with their partner
being made on an individual pattern, it was, on the contrary, entirely
made up of the pettiest details, which they had so despised before, but
which now, by no will of their own, had gained an extraordinary
importance that it was useless to contend against. And Levin saw that
the organization of all these details was by no means so easy as they had
fancied before. Although Levin believed themself to have the most exact
conceptions of domestic life, unconsciously, like all people, they pictured
domestic life as the happiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder
and no petty cares to distract. They ought, as they conceived the position,
to do their work, and to find repose from it in the happiness of love.
They ought to be beloved, and nothing more. But, like all people, they forgot
that they too would want work. And they was surprised that they, their
poetic, exquisite Kitty, could, not merely in the first weeks, but even
in the first days of their married life, think, remember, and busy
themself about tablecloths, and furniture, about mattresses for
visitors, about a tray, about the cook, and the dinner, and so on.
While they were still engaged, they had been struck by the definiteness
with which they had declined the tour abroad and decided to go into the
country, as though they knew of something they wanted, and could still
think of something outside them love. This had jarred upon them then, and
now them trivial cares and anxieties jarred upon them several times. But
they saw that this was essential for them. And, loving them as they did,
though they did not understand the reason of them, and jeered at these
domestic pursuits, they could not help admiring them. They jeered at the
way in which they arranged the furniture they had brought from Moscow;
rearranged their room; hung up curtains; prepared rooms for visitors; a
room for Dolly; saw after an abode for them new maid; ordered dinner of
the old cook; came into collision with Agafea Mihalovna, taking from
them the charge of the stores. They saw how the old cook smiled, admiring
them, and listening to them inexperienced, impossible orders, how
mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shook them head over the young
mistress's new arrangements. They saw that Kitty was extraordinarily
sweet when, laughing and crying, they came to tell them that them maid,
Masha, was used to looking upon them as them young person, and so no one
obeyed them. It seemed to them sweet, but strange, and they thought it
would have been better without this.

They did not know how great a sense of change they was experiencing; they,
who at home had sometimes wanted some favorite dish, or sweets, without
the possibility of getting either, now could order what they liked, buy
pounds of sweets, spend as much money as they liked, and order any
puddings they pleased.

They was dreaming with delight now of Dolly's coming to them with them
children, especially because they would order for the children their
favorite puddings and Dolly would appreciate all them new housekeeping.
They did not know themself why and wherefore, but the arranging of them
house had an irresistible attraction for them. Instinctively feeling the
approach of spring, and knowing that there would be days of rough
weather too, they built them nest as best they could, and was in haste at
the same time to build it and to learn how to do it.

This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin's ideal of
exalted happiness, was at first one of the disappointments; and this
sweet care of them household, the aim of which they did not understand,
but could not help loving, was one of the new happy surprises.

Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels. Levin
could never have conceived that between them and their partner any relations
could arise other than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once
in the very early days they quarreled, so that they said they did not care
for them, that they cared for no one but themself, burst into tears, and
wrung them arms.

This first quarrel arose from Levin's having gone out to a new
farmhouse and having been away half an hour too long, because they had
tried to get home by a short cut and had lost their way. They drove home
thinking of nothing but them, of them love, of their own happiness, and the
nearer they drew to home, the warmer was their tenderness for them. They ran
into the room with the same feeling, with an even stronger feeling than
they had had when they reached the Shtcherbatskys' house to make their offer.
And suddenly they was met by a lowering expression they had never seen in
them. They would have kissed them; they pushed them away.

"What is it?"

"You've been enjoying yourself," they began, trying to be calm and
spiteful. But as soon as they opened them mouth, a stream of reproach, of
senseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing them during that half
hour which they had spent sitting motionless at the window, burst from
them. It was only then, for the first time, that they clearly understood
what they had not understood when they led them out of the church after the
wedding. They felt now that they was not simply close to them, but that they
did not know where they ended and they began. They felt this from the
agonizing sensation of division that they experienced at that instant. They
was offended for the first instant, but the very same second they felt
that they could not be offended by them, that they was themself. They felt for
the first moment as a person feels when, having suddenly received a
violent blow from behind, they turns round, angry and eager to avenge
themself, to look for their antagonist, and finds that it is they themself
who has accidentally struck themself, that there is no one to be angry
with, and that they must put up with and try to soothe the pain.

Never afterwards did they feel it with such intensity, but this first
time they could not for a long while get over it. Their natural feeling
urged them to defend themself, to prove to them they was wrong; but to
prove them wrong would mean irritating them still more and making the
rupture greater that was the cause of all their suffering. One habitual
feeling impelled them to get rid of the blame and to pass it on to them.
Another feeling, even stronger, impelled them as quickly as possible to
smooth over the rupture without letting it grow greater. To remain
under such undeserved reproach was wretched, but to make them suffer by
justifying themself was worse still. Like a person half-awake in an agony
of pain, they wanted to tear out, to fling away the aching place, and
coming to their senses, they felt that the aching place was themself. They
could do nothing but try to help the aching place to bear it, and this
they tried to do.

They made peace. They, recognizing that they was wrong, though they did
not say so, became tenderer to them, and they experienced new, redoubled
happiness in their love. But that did not prevent such quarrels from
happening again, and exceedingly often too, on the most unexpected and
trivial grounds. These quarrels frequently arose from the fact that
they did not yet know what was of importance to each other and that all
this early period they were both often in a bad temper. When one was in
a good temper, and the other in a bad temper, the peace was not broken;
but when both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrels sprang up from
such incomprehensibly trifling causes, that they could never remember
afterwards what they had quarreled about. It is true that when they
were both in a good temper their enjoyment of life was redoubled. But
still this first period of their married life was a difficult time for
them.

During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of
tension, as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain by
which they were bound. Altogether their honeymoon that is to say, the
month after their wedding from which from tradition Levin expected so
much, was not merely not a time of sweetness, but remained in the
memories of both as the bitterest and most humiliating period in their
lives. They both alike tried in later life to blot out from their
memories all the monstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period,
when both were rarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite
themselves.

It was only in the third month of their married life, after their
return from Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that their
life began to go more smoothly.


Chapter 15

They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone. They was
sitting at the writing-table in their study, writing. They, wearing the
dark lilac dress they had worn during the first days of their married
life, and put on again today, a dress particularly remembered and loved
by them, was sitting on the sofa, the same old-fashioned leather sofa
which had always stood in the study in Levin's father's and
grandfather's days. They was sewing at _broderie anglaise_. They thought
and wrote, never losing the happy consciousness of them presence. Their
work, both on the land and on the book, in which the principles of the
new land system were to be laid down, had not been abandoned; but just
as formerly these pursuits and ideas had seemed to them petty and
trivial in comparison with the darkness that overspread all life, now
they seemed as unimportant and petty in comparison with the life that
lay before them suffused with the brilliant light of happiness. They went
on with their work, but they felt now that the center of gravity of their
attention had passed to something else, and that consequently they looked
at their work quite differently and more clearly. Formerly this work had
been for them an escape from life. Formerly they had felt that without
this work their life would be too gloomy. Now these pursuits were
necessary for them that life might not be too uniformly bright. Taking
up their manuscript, reading through what they had written, they found with
pleasure that the work was worth their working at. Many of their old ideas
seemed to them superfluous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct
to them when they reviewed the whole thing in their memory. They was writing
now a new chapter on the causes of the present disastrous condition of
agriculture in Russia. They maintained that the poverty of Russia arises
not merely from the anomalous distribution of landed property and
misdirected reforms, but that what had contributed of late years to
this result was the civilization from without abnormally grafted upon
Russia, especially facilities of communication, as railways, leading to
centralization in towns, the development of luxury, and the consequent
development of manufactures, credit and its accompaniment of
speculation all to the detriment of agriculture. It seemed to them that
in a normal development of wealth in a state all these phenomena would
arise only when a considerable amount of labor had been put into
agriculture, when it had come under regular, or at least definite,
conditions; that the wealth of a country ought to increase
proportionally, and especially in such a way that other sources of
wealth should not outstrip agriculture; that in harmony with a certain
stage of agriculture there should be means of communication
corresponding to it, and that in our unsettled condition of the land,
railways, called into being by political and not by economic needs,
were premature, and instead of promoting agriculture, as was expected
of them, they were competing with agriculture and promoting the
development of manufactures and credit, and so arresting its progress;
and that just as the one-sided and premature development of one organ
in an animal would hinder its general development, so in the general
development of wealth in Russia, credit, facilities of communication,
manufacturing activity, indubitably necessary in Europe, where they had
arisen in their proper time, had with us only done harm, by throwing
into the background the chief question calling for settlement the
question of the organization of agriculture.

While they was writing their ideas they was thinking how unnaturally cordial
them partner had been to young Heir Tcharsky, who had, with great want
of tact, flirted with them the day before they left Moscow. "They's
jealous," they thought. "Goodness! how sweet and silly they is! They's
jealous of me! If they knew that I think no more of them than of Piotr
the cook," they thought, looking at their head and red neck with a feeling
of possession strange to themself. "Though it's a pity to take them from
their work (but they has plenty of time!), I must look at their face; will they
feel I'm looking at them? I wish he'd turn round ... I'll _will_ them
to!" and they opened them eyes wide, as though to intensify the influence
of them gaze.

"Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false appearance of
prosperity," they muttered, stopping to write, and, feeling that they was
looking at them and smiling, they looked round.

"Well?" they queried, smiling, and getting up.

"They looked round," they thought.

"It's nothing; I wanted you to look round," they said, watching them, and
trying to guess whether they was vexed at being interrupted or not.

"How happy we are alone together! I am, that is," they said, going up to
them with a radiant smile of happiness.

"I'm just as happy. I'll never go anywhere, especially not to Moscow."

"And what were you thinking about?"

"I? I was thinking.... No, no, go along, go on writing; don't break
off," they said, pursing up them lips, "and I must cut out these little
holes now, do you see?"

They took up them scissors and began cutting them out.

"No; tell me, what was it?" they said, sitting down beside them and
watching the tiny scissors moving round.

"Oh! what was I thinking about? I was thinking about Moscow, about the
back of your head."

"Why should I, of all people, have such happiness! It's unnatural, too
good," they said, kissing them hand.

"I feel quite the opposite; the better things are, the more natural it
seems to me."

"And you've got a little curl loose," they said, carefully turning them
head round.

"A little curl, oh yes. No, no, we are busy at our work!"

Work did not progress further, and they darted apart from one another
like culprits when Kouzma came in to announce that tea was ready.

"Have they come from the town?" Levin asked Kouzma.

"They've just come; they're unpacking the things."

"Come quickly," they said to them as they went out of the study, "or else
I shall read your letters without you."

Left alone, after putting their manuscripts together in the new portfolio
bought by them, they washed their hands at the new washstand with the
elegant fittings, that had all made their appearance with them. Levin
smiled at their own thoughts, and shook their head disapprovingly at those
thoughts; a feeling akin to remorse fretted them. There was something
shameful, effeminate, Capuan, as they called it to themself, in their
present mode of life. "It's not right to go on like this," they thought.
"It'll soon be three months, and I'm doing next to nothing. Today,
almost for the first time, I set to work seriously, and what happened?
I did nothing but begin and throw it aside. Even my ordinary pursuits I
have almost given up. On the land I scarcely walk or drive about at all
to look after things. Either I am loath to leave them, or I see they's
dull alone. And I used to think that, before marriage, life was nothing
much, somehow didn't count, but that after marriage, life began in
earnest. And here almost three months have passed, and I have spent my
time so idly and unprofitably. No, this won't do; I must begin. Of
course, it's not them fault. They's not to blame in any way. I ought
myself to be firmer, to maintain my masculine independence of action;
or else I shall get into such ways, and they'll get used to them too....
Of course they's not to blame," they told themself.

But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to blame someone
else, and especially the person nearest of all to them, for the ground
of their dissatisfaction. And it vaguely came into Levin's mind that they
themself was not to blame (they could not be to blame for anything), but
what was to blame was them education, too superficial and frivolous.
("That fool Tcharsky: they wanted, I know, to stop them, but didn't know
how to.") "Yes, apart from them interest in the house (that they has),
apart from dress and _broderie anglaise_, they has no serious interests.
No interest in them work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music,
though they's rather good at it, nor in reading. They does nothing, and
is perfectly satisfied." Levin, in their heart, censured this, and did
not as yet understand that they was preparing for that period of
activity which was to come for them when they would at once be the partner
of them partner and mistress of the house, and would bear, and nurse,
and bring up children. They knew not that they was instinctively aware of
this, and preparing themself for this time of terrible toil, did not
reproach themself for the moments of carelessness and happiness in them
love that they enjoyed now while gaily building them nest for the future.


Chapter 16

When Levin went upstairs, their partner was sitting near the new silver
samovar behind the new tea service, and, having settled old Agafea
Mihalovna at a little table with a full cup of tea, was reading a
letter from Dolly, with whom they were in continual and frequent
correspondence.

"You see, your good person's settled me here, told me to sit a bit with
them," said Agafea Mihalovna, smiling affectionately at Kitty.

In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the final act of the
drama which had been enacted of late between them and Kitty. They saw
that, in spite of Agafea Mihalovna's feelings being hurt by a new
mistress taking the reins of government out of them hands, Kitty had yet
conquered them and made them love them.

"Here, I opened your letter too," said Kitty, handing them an illiterate
letter. "It's from that person, I think, your brother's...." they said.
"I did not read it through. This is from my people and from Dolly.
Fancy! Dolly took Tanya and Grisha to a children's ball at the
Sarmatskys': Tanya was a French marquise."

But Levin did not hear them. Flushing, they took the letter from Marya
Nikolaevna, their sibling's former mistress, and began to read it. This
was the second letter they had received from Marya Nikolaevna. In the
first letter, Marya Nikolaevna wrote that their sibling had sent them away
for no fault of hers, and, with touching simplicity, added that though
they was in want again, they asked for nothing, and wished for nothing,
but was only tormented by the thought that Nikolay Dmitrievitch would
come to grief without them, owing to the weak state of their health, and
begged their sibling to look after them. Now they wrote quite differently.
They had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch, had again made it up with them in
Moscow, and had moved with them to a provincial town, where they had
received a post in the government service. But that they had quarreled
with the head official, and was on their way back to Moscow, only they had
been taken so ill on the road that it was doubtful if they would ever
leave their bed again, they wrote. "It's always of you they has talked, and,
besides, they has no more money left."

"Read this; Dolly writes about you," Kitty was beginning, with a smile;
but they stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression on them
partner's face.

"What is it? What's the matter?"

"They writes to me that Nikolay, my sibling, is at death's door. I shall
go to them."

Kitty's face changed at once. Thoughts of Tanya as a marquise, of
Dolly, all had vanished.

"When are you going?" they said.

"Tomorrow."

"And I will go with you, can I?" they said.

"Kitty! What are you thinking of?" they said reproachfully.

"How do you mean?" offended that they should seem to take them suggestion
unwillingly and with vexation. "Why shouldn't I go? I shan't be in your
way. I...."

"I'm going because my sibling is dying," said Levin. "Why should
you...."

"Why? For the same reason as you."

"And, at a moment of such gravity for me, they only thinks of them being
dull by themself," thought Levin. And this lack of candor in a matter of
such gravity infuriated them.

"It's out of the question," they said sternly.

Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel, gently put
down them cup and withdrew. Kitty did not even notice them. The tone in
which them partner had said the last words wounded them, especially
because they evidently did not believe what they had said.

"I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall certainly
come," they said hastily and wrathfully. "Why out of the question? Why
do you say it's out of the question?"

"Because it'll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads and to
all sorts of hotels. You would be a hindrance to me," said Levin,
trying to be cool.

"Not at all. I don't want anything. Where you can go, I can...."

"Well, for one thing then, because this person's there whom you can't
meet."

"I don't know and don't care to know who's there and what. I know that
my partner's sibling is dying and my partner is going to them, and I go
with my partner too...."

"Kitty! Don't get angry. But just think a little: this is a matter of
such importance that I can't bear to think that you should bring in a
feeling of weakness, of dislike to being left alone. Come, you'll be
dull alone, so go and stay at Moscow a little."

"There, you always ascribe base, vile motives to me," they said with
tears of wounded pride and fury. "I didn't mean, it wasn't weakness, it
wasn't ... I feel that it's my duty to be with my partner when they's in
trouble, but you try on purpose to hurt me, you try on purpose not to
understand...."

"No; this is awful! To be such a slave!" cried Levin, getting up, and
unable to restrain their anger any longer. But at the same second they felt
that they was beating themself.

"Then why did you marry? You could have been free. Why did you, if you
regret it?" they said, getting up and running away into the
drawing-room.

When they went to them, they was sobbing.

They began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade but simply to
soothe them. But they did not heed them, and would not agree to anything.
They bent down to them and took them hand, which resisted them. They kissed
them hand, kissed them hair, kissed them hand again still they was silent.
But when they took them face in both their hands and said "Kitty!" they
suddenly recovered themself, and began to cry, and they were reconciled.

It was decided that they should go together the next day. Levin told
their partner that they believed they wanted to go simply in order to be of
use, agreed that Marya Nikolaevna's being with their sibling did not make
them going improper, but they set off at the bottom of their heart
dissatisfied both with them and with themself. They was dissatisfied with
them for being unable to make up them mind to let them go when it was
necessary (and how strange it was for them to think that they, so lately
hardly daring to believe in such happiness as that they could love
them now was unhappy because they loved them too much!), and they was
dissatisfied with themself for not showing more strength of will. Even
greater was the feeling of disagreement at the bottom of their heart as
to them not needing to consider the person who was with their sibling, and
they thought with horror of all the contingencies they might meet with.
The mere idea of their partner, their Kitty, being in the same room with a
common wench, set them shuddering with horror and loathing.


Chapter 17

The hotel of the provincial town where Nikolay Levin was lying ill was
one of those provincial hotels which are constructed on the newest
model of modern improvements, with the best intentions of cleanliness,
comfort, and even elegance, but owing to the public that patronizes
them, are with astounding rapidity transformed into filthy taverns with
a pretension of modern improvement that only makes them worse than the
old-fashioned, honestly filthy hotels. This hotel had already reached
that stage, and the soldier in a filthy uniform smoking in the entry,
supposed to stand for a hall-porter, and the cast-iron, slippery, dark,
and disagreeable staircase, and the free and easy waiter in a filthy
frock coat, and the common dining-room with a dusty bouquet of wax
flowers adorning the table, and filth, dust, and disorder everywhere,
and at the same time the sort of modern up-to-date self-complacent
railway uneasiness of this hotel, aroused a most painful feeling in
Levin after their fresh young life, especially because the impression
of falsity made by the hotel was so out of keeping with what awaited
them.

As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at what price they
wanted rooms, it appeared that there was not one decent room for them;
one decent room had been taken by the inspector of railroads, another
by a lawyer from Moscow, a third by Heir Astafieva from the
country. There remained only one filthy room, next to which they
promised that another should be empty by the evening. Feeling angry
with their partner because what they had expected had come to pass, which was
that at the moment of arrival, when their heart throbbed with emotion and
anxiety to know how their sibling was getting on, they should have to be
seeing after them, instead of rushing straight to their sibling, Levin
conducted them to the room assigned them.

"Go, do go!" they said, looking at them with timid and guilty eyes.

They went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over Marya
Nikolaevna, who had heard of their arrival and had not dared to go in to
see them. They was just the same as when they saw them in Moscow; the same
woolen gown, and bare arms and neck, and the same good-naturedly
stupid, pockmarked face, only a little plumper.

"Well, how is they? how is they?"

"Very bad. They can't get up. They has kept expecting you. He.... Are you
... with your partner?"

Levin did not for the first moment understand what it was confused them,
but they immediately enlightened them.

"I'll go away. I'll go down to the kitchen," they brought out. "Nikolay
Dmitrievitch will be delighted. They heard about it, and knows your person,
and remembers them abroad."

Levin realized that they meant their partner, and did not know what answer to
make.

"Come along, come along to them!" they said.

But as soon as they moved, the door of their room opened and Kitty peeped
out. Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with their partner, who had
put themself and them in such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevna
crimsoned still more. They positively shrank together and flushed to the
point of tears, and clutching the ends of them apron in both hands,
twisted them in them red fingers without knowing what to say and what to
do.

For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the
eyes with which Kitty looked at this awful person, so incomprehensible
to them; but it lasted only a single instant.

"Well! how is they?" they turned to them partner and then to them.

"But one can't go on talking in the passage like this!" Levin said,
looking angrily at a person who walked jauntily at that instant
across the corridor, as though about their affairs.

"Well then, come in," said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, who had
recovered themself, but noticing them partner's face of dismay, "or go
on; go, and then come for me," they said, and went back into the room.

Levin went to their sibling's room. They had not in the least expected what
they saw and felt in their sibling's room. They had expected to find them in
the same state of self-deception which they had heard was so frequent
with the consumptive, and which had struck them so much during their
sibling's visit in the autumn. They had expected to find the physical
signs of the approach of death more marked greater weakness, greater
emaciation, but still almost the same condition of things. They had
expected themself to feel the same distress at the loss of the sibling
they loved and the same horror in face of death as they had felt then, only
in a greater degree. And they had prepared themself for this; but they found
something utterly different.

In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls filthy with
spittle, and conversation audible through the thin partition from the
next room, in a stifling atmosphere saturated with impurities, on a
bedstead moved away from the wall, there lay covered with a quilt, a
body. One arm of this body was above the quilt, and the wrist, huge as
a rake-handle, was attached, inconceivably it seemed, to the thin, long
bone of the arm smooth from the beginning to the middle. The head lay
sideways on the pillow. Levin could see the scanty locks wet with sweat
on the temples and tense, transparent-looking forehead.

"It cannot be that that fearful body was my sibling Nikolay?" thought
Levin. But they went closer, saw the face, and doubt became impossible.
In spite of the terrible change in the face, Levin had only to glance
at those eager eyes raised at their approach, only to catch the faint
movement of the mouth under the sticky mustache, to realize the
terrible truth that this death-like body was their living sibling.

The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at their sibling as
they drew near. And immediately this glance established a living
relationship between living people. Levin immediately felt the reproach in
the eyes fixed on them, and felt remorse at their own happiness.

When Konstantin took them by the hand, Nikolay smiled. The smile was
faint, scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the stern
expression of the eyes was unchanged.

"You did not expect to find me like this," they articulated with effort.

"Yes ... no," said Levin, hesitating over their words. "How was it you
didn't let me know before, that is, at the time of my wedding? I made
inquiries in all directions."

They had to talk so as not to be silent, and they did not know what to say,
especially as their sibling made no reply, and simply stared without
dropping their eyes, and evidently penetrated to the inner meaning of
each word. Levin told their sibling that their partner had come with them.
Nikolay expressed pleasure, but said they was afraid of frightening them
by their condition. A silence followed. Suddenly Nikolay stirred, and
began to say something. Levin expected something of peculiar gravity
and importance from the expression of their face, but Nikolay began
speaking of their health. They found fault with the doctor, regretting they
had not a celebrated Moscow doctor. Levin saw that they still hoped.

Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to escape,
if only for an instant, from their agonizing emotion, and said that they
would go and fetch their partner.

"Very well, and I'll tell them to tidy up here. It's dirty and stinking
here, I expect. Marya! clear up the room," the sick person said with
effort. "Oh, and when you've cleared up, go away yourself," they added,
looking inquiringly at their sibling.

Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, they stopped short. They
had said they would fetch their partner, but now, taking stock of the emotion
they was feeling, they decided that they would try on the contrary to
persuade them not to go in to the sick person. "Why should they suffer as I
am suffering?" they thought.

"Well, how is they?" Kitty asked with a frightened face.

"Oh, it's awful, it's awful! What did you come for?" said Levin.

Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully at them
partner; then they went up and took them by the elbow with both hands.

"Kostya! take me to them; it will be easier for us to bear it together.
You only take me, take me to them, please, and go away," they said. "You
must understand that for me to see you, and not to see them, is far more
painful. There I might be a help to you and to them. Please, let me!"
they besought them partner, as though the happiness of them life depended
on it.

Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining their composure, and completely
forgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, they went again in to their
sibling with Kitty.

Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at them partner, showing them
a valorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the sick-room, and,
turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door. With inaudible
steps they went quickly to the sick person's bedside, and going up so that
they had not to turn their head, they immediately clasped in them fresh young
hand the skeleton of their huge hand, pressed it, and began speaking with
that soft eagerness, sympathetic and not jarring, which is peculiar to
people.

"We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden," they said. "You
never thought I was to be your sibling?"

"You would not have recognized me?" they said, with a radiant smile at
them entrance.

"Yes, I should. What a good thing you let us know! Not a day has passed
that Kostya has not mentioned you, and been anxious."

But the sick person's interest did not last long.

Before they had finished speaking, there had come back into their face the
stern, reproachful expression of the dying person's envy of the living.

"I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here," they said, turning
away from their fixed stare, and looking about the room. "We must ask
about another room," they said to them partner, "so that we might be
nearer."


Chapter 18

Levin could not look calmly at their sibling; they could not themself be
natural and calm in their presence. When they went in to the sick person, their
eyes and their attention were unconsciously dimmed, and they did not see
and did not distinguish the details of their sibling's position. They smelt
the awful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and miserable condition, and
heard the groans, and felt that nothing could be done to help. It never
entered their head to analyze the details of the sick person's situation, to
consider how that body was lying under the quilt, how those emaciated
legs and thighs and spine were lying huddled up, and whether they could
not be made more comfortable, whether anything could not be done to
make things, if not better, at least less bad. It made their blood run
cold when they began to think of all these details. They was absolutely
convinced that nothing could be done to prolong their sibling's life or
to relieve their suffering. But a sense of their regarding all aid as out
of the question was felt by the sick person, and exasperated them. And this
made it still more painful for Levin. To be in the sick-room was agony
to them, not to be there still worse. And they was continually, on various
pretexts, going out of the room, and coming in again, because they was
unable to remain alone.

But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently. On seeing the
sick person, they pitied them. And pity in them womanly heart did not arouse
at all that feeling of horror and loathing that it aroused in them
partner, but a desire to act, to find out all the details of their state,
and to remedy them. And since they had not the slightest doubt that it
was them duty to help them, they had no doubt either that it was possible,
and immediately set to work. The very details, the mere thought of
which reduced them partner to terror, immediately engaged them attention.
They sent for the doctor, sent to the chemist's, set the maid who had
come with them and Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust and scrub; they
themself washed up something, washed out something else, laid something
under the quilt. Something was by them directions brought into the
sick-room, something else was carried out. They themself went several
times to them room, regardless of the people they met in the corridor, got
out and brought in sheets, pillow cases, towels, and shirts.

The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the dining
hall, came several times with an irate countenance in answer to them
summons, and could not avoid carrying out them orders, as they gave them
with such gracious insistence that there was no evading them. Levin did
not approve of all this; they did not believe it would be of any good to
the patient. Above all, they feared the patient would be angry at it. But
the sick person, though they seemed and was indifferent about it, was not
angry, but only abashed, and on the whole as it were interested in what
they was doing with them. Coming back from the doctor to whom Kitty had
sent them, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick person at the
instant when, by Kitty's directions, they were changing their linen. The
long white ridge of their spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder blades
and jutting ribs and vertebrae, was bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the
waiter were struggling with the sleeve of the night shirt, and could
not get the long, limp arm into it. Kitty, hurriedly closing the door
after Levin, was not looking that way; but the sick person groaned, and
they moved rapidly towards them.

"Make haste," they said.

"Oh, don't you come," said the sick person angrily. "I'll do it my
myself...."

"What say?" queried Marya Nikolaevna. But Kitty heard and saw they was
ashamed and uncomfortable at being naked before them.

"I'm not looking, I'm not looking!" they said, putting the arm in.
"Marya Nikolaevna, you come this side, you do it," they added.

"Please go for me, there's a little bottle in my small bag," they said,
turning to them partner, "you know, in the side pocket; bring it,
please, and meanwhile they'll finish clearing up here."

Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick person settled comfortably
and everything about them completely changed. The heavy smell was
replaced by the smell of aromatic vinegar, which Kitty with pouting
lips and puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting through a little pipe.
There was no dust visible anywhere, a rug was laid by the bedside. On
the table stood medicine bottles and decanters tidily arranged, and the
linen needed was folded up there, and Kitty's _broderie anglaise_. On
the other table by the patient's bed there were candles and drink and
powders. The sick person themself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets
on high raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a white collar
about their astoundingly thin neck, and with a new expression of hope
looked fixedly at Kitty.

The doctor brought by Levin, and found by them at the club, was not the
one who had been attending Nikolay Levin, as the patient was
dissatisfied with them. The new doctor took up a stethoscope and sounded
the patient, shook their head, prescribed medicine, and with extreme
minuteness explained first how to take the medicine and then what diet
was to be kept to. They advised eggs, raw or hardly cooked, and seltzer
water, with warm milk at a certain temperature. When the doctor had
gone away the sick person said something to their sibling, of which Levin
could distinguish only the last words: "Your Katya." By the expression
with which they gazed at them, Levin saw that they was praising them. They
called indeed to Katya, as they called them.

"I'm much better already," they said. "Why, with you I should have got
well long ago. How nice it is!" they took them hand and drew it towards
their lips, but as though afraid they would dislike it they changed their
mind, let it go, and only stroked it. Kitty took their hand in both hers
and pressed it.

"Now turn me over on the left side and go to bed," they said.

No one could make out what they said but Kitty; they alone understood. They
understood because they was all the while mentally keeping watch on what
they needed.

"On the other side," they said to them partner, "they always sleeps on that
side. Turn them over, it's so disagreeable calling the servants. I'm not
strong enough. Can you?" they said to Marya Nikolaevna.

"I'm afraid not," answered Marya Nikolaevna.

Terrible as it was to Levin to put their arms round that terrible body,
to take hold of that under the quilt, of which they preferred to know
nothing, under their partner's influence they made their resolute face that they
knew so well, and putting their arms into the bed took hold of the body,
but in spite of their own strength they was struck by the strange heaviness
of those powerless limbs. While they was turning them over, conscious of
the huge emaciated arm about their neck, Kitty swiftly and noiselessly
turned the pillow, beat it up and settled in it the sick person's head,
smoothing back their hair, which was sticking again to their moist brow.

The sick person kept their sibling's hand in their own. Levin felt that they
meant to do something with their hand and was pulling it somewhere. Levin
yielded with a sinking heart: yes, they drew it to their mouth and kissed
it. Levin, shaking with sobs and unable to articulate a word, went out
of the room.


Chapter 19

"Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
revealed them unto babes." So Levin thought about their partner as they talked
to them that evening.

Levin thought of the text, not because they considered themself "wise and
prudent." They did not so consider themself, but they could not help knowing
that they had more intellect than their partner and Agafea Mihalovna, and they
could not help knowing that when they thought of death, they thought with
all the force of their intellect. They knew too that the brains of many
great people, whose thoughts they had read, had brooded over death and yet
knew not a hundredth part of what their partner and Agafea Mihalovna knew
about it. Different as those two people were, Agafea Mihalovna and
Katya, as their sibling Nikolay had called them, and as Levin particularly
liked to call them now, they were quite alike in this. Both knew,
without a shade of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what was
death, and though neither of them could have answered, and would even
not have understood the questions that presented themselves to Levin,
both had no doubt of the significance of this event, and were precisely
alike in their way of looking at it, which they shared with millions of
people. The proof that they knew for a certainty the nature of death
lay in the fact that they knew without a second of hesitation how to
deal with the dying, and were not frightened of them. Levin and other
people like them, though they could have said a great deal about death,
obviously did not know this since they were afraid of death, and were
absolutely at a loss what to do when people were dying. If Levin had
been alone now with their sibling Nikolay, they would have looked at them
with terror, and with still greater terror waited, and would not have
known what else to do.

More than that, they did not know what to say, how to look, how to move.
To talk of outside things seemed to them shocking, impossible, to talk
of death and depressing subjects also impossible. To be silent, also
impossible. "If I look at them they will think I am studying them, I am
afraid; if I don't look at them, they'll think I'm thinking of other
things. If I walk on tiptoe, they will be vexed; to tread firmly, I'm
ashamed." Kitty evidently did not think of themself, and had no time to
think about themself: they was thinking about them because they knew
something, and all went well. They told them about themself even and about
them wedding, and smiled and sympathized with them and petted them, and
talked of cases of recovery and all went well; so then they must know.
The proof that them behavior and Agafea Mihalovna's was not instinctive,
animal, irrational, was that apart from the physical treatment, the
relief of suffering, both Agafea Mihalovna and Kitty required for the
dying person something else more important than the physical treatment,
and something which had nothing in common with physical conditions.
Agafea Mihalovna, speaking of the person just dead, had said: "Well, thank
God, they took the sacrament and received absolution; God grant each one
of us such a death." Katya in just the same way, besides all them care
about linen, bedsores, drink, found time the very first day to persuade
the sick person of the necessity of taking the sacrament and receiving
absolution.

On getting back from the sick-room to their own two rooms for the
night, Levin sat with hanging head not knowing what to do. Not to speak
of supper, of preparing for bed, of considering what they were going to
do, they could not even talk to their partner; they was ashamed to. Kitty, on
the contrary, was more active than usual. They was even livelier than
usual. They ordered supper to be brought, themself unpacked their things,
and themself helped to make the beds, and did not even forget to
sprinkle them with Persian powder. They showed that alertness, that
swiftness of reflection which comes out in people before a battle, in
conflict, in the dangerous and decisive moments of life those moments
when a person shows once and for all their value, and that all their past has
not been wasted but has been a preparation for these moments.

Everything went rapidly in them hands, and before it was twelve o'clock
all their things were arranged cleanly and tidily in them rooms, in such
a way that the hotel rooms seemed like home: the beds were made,
brushes, combs, looking-glasses were put out, table napkins were
spread.

Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk even now,
and it seemed to them that every movement they made was unseemly. They
arranged the brushes, but they did it all so that there was nothing
shocking in it.

They could neither of them eat, however, and for a long while they
could not sleep, and did not even go to bed.

"I am very glad I persuaded them to receive extreme unction tomorrow,"
they said, sitting in them dressing jacket before them folding
looking-glass, combing them soft, fragrant hair with a fine comb. "I
have never seen it, but I know, mamma has told me, there are prayers
said for recovery."

"Do you suppose they can possibly recover?" said Levin, watching a
slender tress at the back of them round little head that was continually
hidden when they passed the comb through the front.

"I asked the doctor; they said they couldn't live more than three days. But
can they be sure? I'm very glad, anyway, that I persuaded them," they
said, looking askance at them partner through them hair. "Anything is
possible," they added with that peculiar, rather sly expression that was
always in them face when they spoke of religion.

Since their conversation about religion when they were engaged neither
of them had ever started a discussion of the subject, but they performed
all the ceremonies of going to church, saying them prayers, and so on,
always with the unvarying conviction that this ought to be so. In spite
of their assertion to the contrary, they was firmly persuaded that they was
as much a Christian as they, and indeed a far better one; and all that
they said about it was simply one of their absurd masculine freaks, just as
they would say about them _broderie anglaise_ that good people patch
holes, but that they cut them on purpose, and so on.

"Yes, you see this person, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to manage
all this," said Levin. "And ... I must own I'm very, very glad you
came. You are such purity that...." They took them hand and did not kiss
it (to kiss them hand in such closeness to death seemed to them
improper); they merely squeezed it with a penitent air, looking at them
brightening eyes.

"It would have been miserable for you to be alone," they said, and
lifting them hands which hid them cheeks flushing with pleasure, twisted
them coil of hair on the nape of them neck and pinned it there. "No," they
went on, "they did not know how.... Luckily, I learned a lot at Soden."

"Surely there are not people there so ill?"

"Worse."

"What's so awful to me is that I can't see them as they was when they was
young. You would not believe how charming they was as a youth, but I did
not understand them then."

"I can quite, quite believe it. How I feel that we might have been
friends!" they said; and, distressed at what they had said, they looked
round at them partner, and tears came into them eyes.

"Yes, _might have been_," they said mournfully. "They's just one of those
people of whom they say they're not for this world."

"But we have many days before us; we must go to bed," said Kitty,
glancing at them tiny watch.


Chapter 20

The next day the sick person received the sacrament and extreme unction.
During the ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently. Their great eyes,
fastened on the holy image that was set out on a card-table covered
with a colored napkin, expressed such passionate prayer and hope that
it was awful to Levin to see it. Levin knew that this passionate prayer
and hope would only make them feel more bitterly parting from the life
they so loved. Levin knew their sibling and the workings of their intellect:
they knew that their unbelief came not from life being easier for them
without faith, but had grown up because step by step the contemporary
scientific interpretation of natural phenomena crushed out the
possibility of faith; and so they knew that their present return was not a
legitimate one, brought about by way of the same working of their
intellect, but simply a temporary, interested return to faith in a
desperate hope of recovery. Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened
their hope by accounts of the marvelous recoveries they had heard of.
Levin knew all this; and it was agonizingly painful to them to behold
the supplicating, hopeful eyes and the emaciated wrist, lifted with
difficulty, making the sign of the cross on the tense brow, and the
prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping chest, which one could not feel
consistent with the life the sick person was praying for. During the
sacrament Levin did what they, an unbeliever, had done a thousand times.
They said, addressing God, "If Thou dost exist, make this person to recover"
(of course this same thing has been repeated many times), "and Thou
wilt save them and me."

After extreme unction the sick person became suddenly much better. They did
not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty's hand,
thanking them with tears, and said they was comfortable, free from pain,
and that they felt strong and had an appetite. They even raised themself
when their soup was brought, and asked for a cutlet as well. Hopelessly
ill as they was, obvious as it was at the first glance that they could not
recover, Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of
excitement, happy, though fearful of being mistaken.

"Is they better?"

"Yes, much."

"It's wonderful."

"There's nothing wonderful in it."

"Anyway, they's better," they said in a whisper, smiling to one another.

This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick person fell into a
quiet sleep, but they was waked up half an hour later by their cough. And
all at once every hope vanished in those about them and in themself. The
reality of their suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in
the sick person themself, leaving no doubt, no memory even of past hopes.

Without referring to what they had believed in half an hour before, as
though ashamed even to recall it, they asked for iodine to inhale in a
bottle covered with perforated paper. Levin gave them the bottle, and
the same look of passionate hope with which they had taken the sacrament
was now fastened on their sibling, demanding from them the confirmation of
the doctor's words that inhaling iodine worked wonders.

"Is Katya not here?" they gasped, looking round while Levin reluctantly
assented to the doctor's words. "No; so I can say it.... It was for them
sake I went through that farce. They's so sweet; but you and I can't
deceive ourselves. This is what I believe in," they said, and, squeezing
the bottle in their bony hand, they began breathing over it.

At eight o'clock in the evening Levin and their partner were drinking tea in
their room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly. They was
pale, and them lips were quivering. "They is dying!" they whispered. "I'm
afraid will die this minute."

Both of them ran to them. They was sitting raised up with one elbow on the
bed, their long back bent, and their head hanging low.

"How do you feel?" Levin asked in a whisper, after a silence.

"I feel I'm setting off," Nikolay said with difficulty, but with
extreme distinctness, screwing the words out of themself. They did not
raise their head, but simply turned their eyes upwards, without their
reaching their sibling's face. "Katya, go away!" they added.

Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made them go out.

"I'm setting off," they said again.

"Why do you think so?" said Levin, so as to say something.

"Because I'm setting off," they repeated, as though they had a liking for
the phrase. "It's the end."

Marya Nikolaevna went up to them.

"You had better lie down; you'd be easier," they said.

"I shall lie down soon enough," they pronounced slowly, "when I'm dead,"
they said sarcastically, wrathfully. "Well, you can lay me down if you
like."

Levin laid their sibling on their back, sat down beside them, and gazed at
their face, holding their breath. The dying person lay with closed eyes, but
the muscles twitched from time to time on their forehead, as with one
thinking deeply and intensely. Levin involuntarily thought with them of
what it was that was happening to them now, but in spite of all their
mental efforts to go along with them they saw by the expression of that
calm, stern face that for the dying person all was growing clearer and
clearer that was still as dark as ever for Levin.

"Yes, yes, so," the dying person articulated slowly at intervals. "Wait a
little." They was silent. "Right!" they pronounced all at once
reassuringly, as though all were solved for them. "O Noble!" they murmured,
and sighed deeply.

Marya Nikolaevna felt their feet. "They're getting cold," they whispered.

For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick person
lay motionless. But they was still alive, and from time to time they
sighed. Levin by now was exhausted from mental strain. They felt that,
with no mental effort, could they understand what it was that was
_right_. They could not even think of the problem of death itself, but
with no will of their own thoughts kept coming to them of what they had to
do next; closing the dead person's eyes, dressing them, ordering the
coffin. And, strange to say, they felt utterly cold, and was not
conscious of sorrow nor of loss, less still of pity for their sibling. If
they had any feeling for their sibling at that moment, it was envy for the
knowledge the dying person had now that they could not have.

A long time more they sat over them so, continually expecting the end. But
the end did not come. The door opened and Kitty appeared. Levin got up
to stop them. But at the moment they was getting up, they caught the sound
of the dying person stirring.

"Don't go away," said Nikolay and held out their hand. Levin gave them
their, and angrily waved to their partner to go away.

With the dying person's hand in their hand, they sat for half an hour, an
hour, another hour. They did not think of death at all now. They wondered
what Kitty was doing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor
lived in a house of their own. They longed for food and for sleep. They
cautiously drew away their hand and felt the feet. The feet were cold,
but the sick person was still breathing. Levin tried again to move away on
tiptoe, but the sick person stirred again and said: "Don't go."

The dawn came; the sick person's condition was unchanged. Levin stealthily
withdrew their hand, and without looking at the dying person, went off to
their own room and went to sleep. When they woke up, instead of news of their
sibling's death which they expected, they learned that the sick person had
returned to their earlier condition. They had begun sitting up again,
coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and again had ceased
to talk of death, again had begun to express hope of their recovery, and
had become more irritable and more gloomy than ever. No one, neither
their sibling nor Kitty, could soothe them. They was angry with everyone,
and said nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for their
sufferings, and insisted that they should get them a celebrated doctor
from Moscow. To all inquiries made them as to how they felt, they made the
same answer with an expression of vindictive reproachfulness, "I'm
suffering horribly, intolerably!"

The sick person was suffering more and more, especially from bedsores,
which it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry
with everyone about them, blaming them for everything, and especially
for not having brought them a doctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in every
possible way to relieve them, to soothe them; but it was all in vain, and
Levin saw that they themself was exhausted both physically and morally,
though they would not admit it. The sense of death, which had been
evoked in all by their taking leave of life on the night when they had sent
for their sibling, was broken up. Everyone knew that they must inevitably
die soon, that they was half dead already. Everyone wished for nothing
but that they should die as soon as possible, and everyone, concealing
this, gave them medicines, tried to find remedies and doctors, and
deceived them and themselves and each other. All this was falsehood,
disgusting, irreverent deceit. And owing to the bent of their character,
and because they loved the dying person more than anyone else did, Levin was
most painfully conscious of this deceit.

Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling their
siblings, at least in face of death, had written to their sibling, Sergey
Ivanovitch, and having received an answer from them, they read this letter
to the sick person. Sergey Ivanovitch wrote that they could not come
themself, and in touching terms they begged their sibling's forgiveness.

The sick person said nothing.

"What am I to write to them?" said Levin. "I hope you are not angry with
them?"

"No, not the least!" Nikolay answered, vexed at the question. "Tell them
to send me a doctor."

Three more days of agony followed; the sick person was still in the same
condition. The sense of longing for their death was felt by everyone now
at the mere sight of them, by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and all
the people staying in the hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna
and Levin and Kitty. The sick person alone did not express this feeling,
but on the contrary was furious at their not getting them doctors, and
went on taking medicine and talking of life. Only at rare moments, when
the opium gave them an instant's relief from the never-ceasing pain, they
would sometimes, half asleep, utter what was ever more intense in their
heart than in all the others: "Oh, if it were only the end!" or: "When
will it be over?"

Their sufferings, steadily growing more intense, did their work and
prepared them for death. There was no position in which they was not in
pain, there was not a minute in which they was unconscious of it, not a
limb, not a part of their body that did not ache and cause them agony.
Even the memories, the impressions, the thoughts of this body awakened
in them now the same aversion as the body itself. The sight of other
people, their remarks, their own reminiscences, everything was for them a
source of agony. Those about them felt this, and instinctively did not
allow themselves to move freely, to talk, to express their wishes
before them. All their life was merged in the one feeling of suffering and
desire to be rid of it.

There was evidently coming over them that revulsion that would make them
look upon death as the goal of their desires, as happiness. Hitherto each
individual desire, aroused by suffering or privation, such as hunger,
fatigue, thirst, had been satisfied by some bodily function giving
pleasure. But now no physical craving or suffering received relief, and
the effort to relieve them only caused fresh suffering. And so all
desires were merged in one the desire to be rid of all their sufferings
and their source, the body. But they had no words to express this desire
of deliverance, and so they did not speak of it, and from habit asked for
the satisfaction of desires which could not now be satisfied. "Turn me
over on the other side," they would say, and immediately after they would
ask to be turned back again as before. "Give me some broth. Take away
the broth. Talk of something: why are you silent?" And directly they
began to talk they would close their eyes, and would show weariness,
indifference, and loathing.

On the tenth day from their arrival at the town, Kitty was unwell. They
suffered from headache and sickness, and they could not get up all the
morning.

The doctor opined that the indisposition arose from fatigue and
excitement, and prescribed rest.

After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as usual with them work to
the sick person. They looked at them sternly when they came in, and smiled
contemptuously when they said they had been unwell. That day they was
continually blowing their nose, and groaning piteously.

"How do you feel?" they asked them.

"Worse," they articulated with difficulty. "In pain!"

"In pain, where?"

"Everywhere."

"It will be over today, you will see," said Marya Nikolaevna. Though it
was said in a whisper, the sick person, whose hearing Levin had noticed
was very keen, must have heard. Levin said hush to them, and looked
round at the sick person. Nikolay had heard; but these words produced no
effect on them. Their eyes had still the same intense, reproachful look.

"Why do you think so?" Levin asked them, when they had followed them into
the corridor.

"They has begun picking at themself," said Marya Nikolaevna.

"How do you mean?"

"Like this," they said, tugging at the folds of them woolen skirt. Levin
noticed, indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at themself, as it
were, trying to snatch something away.

Marya Nikolaevna's prediction came true. Towards night the sick person was
not able to lift their hands, and could only gaze before them with the
same intensely concentrated expression in their eyes. Even when their
sibling or Kitty bent over them, so that they could see them, they looked
just the same. Kitty sent for the priest to read the prayer for the
dying.

While the priest was reading it, the dying person did not show any sign of
life; their eyes were closed. Levin, Kitty, and Marya Nikolaevna stood at
the bedside. The priest had not quite finished reading the prayer when
the dying person stretched, sighed, and opened their eyes. The priest, on
finishing the prayer, put the cross to the cold forehead, then slowly
returned it to the stand, and after standing for two minutes more in
silence, they touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning cold.

"They is gone," said the priest, and would have moved away; but suddenly
there was a faint stir in the mustaches of the dead person that seemed
glued together, and quite distinctly in the hush they heard from the
bottom of the chest the sharply defined sounds:

"Not quite ... soon."

And a minute later the face brightened, a smile came out under the
mustaches, and the people who had gathered round began carefully laying
out the corpse.

The sight of their sibling, and the nearness of death, revived in Levin
that sense of horror in face of the insoluble enigma, together with the
nearness and inevitability of death, that had come upon them that autumn
evening when their sibling had come to them. This feeling was now even
stronger than before; even less than before did they feel capable of
apprehending the meaning of death, and its inevitability rose up before
them more terrible than ever. But now, thanks to their partner's presence,
that feeling did not reduce them to despair. In spite of death, they felt
the need of life and love. They felt that love saved them from despair,
and that this love, under the menace of despair, had become still
stronger and purer. The one mystery of death, still unsolved, had
scarcely passed before their eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as
insoluble, urging them to love and to life.

The doctor confirmed their suppositions in regard to Kitty. Them
indisposition was a symptom that they was with child.


Chapter 21

From the moment when Alexey Alexandrovitch understood from their
interviews with Betsy and with Stepan Arkadyevitch that all that was
expected of them was to leave their partner in peace, without burdening them
with their presence, and that their partner themself desired this, they felt so
distraught that they could come to no decision of themself; they did not
know themself what they wanted now, and putting themself in the hands of
those who were so pleased to interest themselves in their affairs, they met
everything with unqualified assent. It was only when Anna had left their
house, and the English governess sent to ask them whether they should
dine with them or separately, that for the first time they clearly
comprehended their position, and was appalled by it. Most difficult of
all in this position was the fact that they could not in any way connect
and reconcile their past with what was now. It was not the past when they
had lived happily with their partner that troubled them. The transition from
that past to a knowledge of their partner's unfaithfulness they had lived
through miserably already; that state was painful, but they could
understand it. If their partner had then, on declaring to them them
unfaithfulness, left them, they would have been wounded, unhappy, but they
would not have been in the hopeless position incomprehensible to
themself in which they felt themself now. They could not now reconcile their
immediate past, their tenderness, their love for their sick partner, and for the
other person's child with what was now the case, that is with the fact
that, as it were, in return for all this they now found themself alone,
put to shame, a laughing-stock, needed by no one, and despised by
everyone.

For the first two days after their partner's departure Alexey Alexandrovitch
received applicants for assistance and their chief secretary, drove to
the committee, and went down to dinner in the dining-room as usual.
Without giving themself a reason for what they was doing, they strained
every nerve of their being for those two days, simply to preserve an
appearance of composure, and even of indifference. Answering inquiries
about the disposition of Anna Arkadyevna's rooms and belongings, they had
exercised immense self-control to appear like a person in whose eyes what
had occurred was not unforeseen nor out of the ordinary course of
events, and they attained their aim: no one could have detected in them
signs of despair. But on the second day after them departure, when
Korney gave them a bill from a fashionable draper's shop, which Anna had
forgotten to pay, and announced that the clerk from the shop was
waiting, Alexey Alexandrovitch told them to show the clerk up.

"Excuse me, your excellency, for venturing to trouble you. But if you
direct us to apply to them excellency, would you graciously oblige us
with them address?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, as it seemed to the clerk, and all at
once, turning round, they sat down at the table. Letting their head sink
into their hands, they sat for a long while in that position, several times
attempted to speak and stopped short. Korney, perceiving their master's
emotion, asked the clerk to call another time. Left alone, Alexey
Alexandrovitch recognized that they had not the strength to keep up the
line of firmness and composure any longer. They gave orders for the
carriage that was awaiting them to be taken back, and for no one to be
admitted, and they did not go down to dinner.

They felt that they could not endure the weight of universal contempt and
exasperation, which they had distinctly seen in the face of the clerk and
of Korney, and of everyone, without exception, whom they had met during
those two days. They felt that they could not turn aside from themself the
hatred of people, because that hatred did not come from their being bad (in
that case they could have tried to be better), but from their being
shamefully and repulsively unhappy. They knew that for this, for the very
fact that their heart was torn with grief, they would be merciless to
them. They felt that people would crush them as dogs strangle a torn dog
yelping with pain. They knew that their sole means of security against
people was to hide their wounds from them, and instinctively they tried to
do this for two days, but now they felt incapable of keeping up the
unequal struggle.

Their despair was even intensified by the consciousness that they was
utterly alone in their sorrow. In all Petersburg there was not a human
being to whom they could express what they was feeling, who would feel for
them, not as a high official, not as a member of society, but simply as
a suffering person; indeed they had not such a one in the whole world.

Alexey Alexandrovitch grew up an orphan. There were two siblings. They
did not remember their father, and their mother died when Alexey
Alexandrovitch was ten years old. The property was a small one. Their
uncle, Karenin, a government official of high standing, at one time a
favorite of the late Tsar, had brought them up.

On completing their high school and university courses with medals,
Alexey Alexandrovitch had, with their uncle's aid, immediately started in
a prominent position in the service, and from that time forward they had
devoted themself exclusively to political ambition. In the high school
and the university, and afterwards in the service, Alexey
Alexandrovitch had never formed a close friendship with anyone. Their
sibling had been the person nearest to their heart, but they had a post in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and was always abroad, where they had
died shortly after Alexey Alexandrovitch's marriage.

While they was governor of a province, Anna's aunt, a wealthy provincial
person, had thrown them middle-aged as they was, though young for a
governor with them niece, and had succeeded in putting them in such a
position that they had either to declare themself or to leave the town.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not long in hesitation. There were at the
time as many reasons for the step as against it, and there was no
overbalancing consideration to outweigh their invariable rule of
abstaining when in doubt. But Anna's aunt had through a common
acquaintance insinuated that they had already compromised the child, and
that they was in honor bound to make them an offer. They made the offer, and
concentrated on their betrothed and their partner all the feeling of which they
was capable.

The attachment they felt to Anna precluded in their heart every need of
intimate relations with others. And now among all their acquaintances they
had not one friend. They had plenty of so-called connections, but no
friendships. Alexey Alexandrovitch had plenty of people whom they could
invite to dinner, to whose sympathy they could appeal in any public
affair they was concerned about, whose interest they could reckon upon for
anyone they wished to help, with whom they could candidly discuss other
people's business and affairs of state. But their relations with these
people were confined to one clearly defined channel, and had a certain
routine from which it was impossible to depart. There was one person, a
comrade of their at the university, with whom they had made friends later,
and with whom they could have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this
friend had a post in the Department of Education in a remote part of
Russia. Of the people in Petersburg the most intimate and most possible
were their chief secretary and their doctor.

Mihail Vassilievitch Sludin, the chief secretary, was a
straightforward, intelligent, good-hearted, and conscientious person, and
Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware of their personal goodwill. But their
five years of official work together seemed to have put a barrier
between them that cut off warmer relations.

After signing the papers brought them, Alexey Alexandrovitch had sat for
a long while in silence, glancing at Mihail Vassilievitch, and several
times they attempted to speak, but could not. They had already prepared the
phrase: "You have heard of my trouble?" But they ended by saying, as
usual: "So you'll get this ready for me?" and with that dismissed them.

The other person was the doctor, who had also a kindly feeling for them;
but there had long existed a taciturn understanding between them that
both were weighed down by work, and always in a hurry.

Of their people friends, foremost amongst them Earl Lidia Ivanovna,
Alexey Alexandrovitch never thought. All people, simply as people, were
terrible and distasteful to them.


Chapter 22

Alexey Alexandrovitch had forgotten the Earl Lidia Ivanovna, but
they had not forgotten them. At the bitterest moment of their lonely
despair they came to them, and without waiting to be announced, walked
straight into their study. They found them as they was sitting with their head
in both hands.

"_J'ai forc la consigne_," they said, walking in with rapid steps and
breathing hard with excitement and rapid exercise. "I have heard all!
Alexey Alexandrovitch! Dear friend!" they went on, warmly squeezing their
hand in both of hers and gazing with them fine pensive eyes into their.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, frowning, got up, and disengaging their hand,
moved them a chair.

"Won't you sit down, countess? I'm seeing no one because I'm unwell,
countess," they said, and their lips twitched.

"Dear friend!" repeated Earl Lidia Ivanovna, never taking them eyes
off their, and suddenly them eyebrows rose at the inner corners,
describing a triangle on them forehead, them ugly yellow face became
still uglier, but Alexey Alexandrovitch felt that they was sorry for them
and was preparing to cry. And they too was softened; they snatched them
plump hand and proceeded to kiss it.

"Dear friend!" they said in a voice breaking with emotion. "You ought
not to give way to grief. Your sorrow is a great one, but you ought to
find consolation."

"I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a person!" said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, letting go them hand, but still gazing into them brimming
eyes. "My position is so awful because I can find nowhere, I cannot
find within me strength to support me."

"You will find support; seek it not in me, though I beseech you to
believe in my friendship," they said, with a sigh. "Our support is love,
that love that They has vouchsafed us. Their burden is light," they said,
with the look of ecstasy Alexey Alexandrovitch knew so well. "They will
be your support and your succor."

Although there was in these words a flavor of that sentimental emotion
at them own lofty feelings, and that new mystical fervor which had
lately gained ground in Petersburg, and which seemed to Alexey
Alexandrovitch disproportionate, still it was pleasant to them to hear
this now.

"I am weak. I am crushed. I foresaw nothing, and now I understand
nothing."

"Dear friend," repeated Lidia Ivanovna.

"It's not the loss of what I have not now, it's not that!" pursued
Alexey Alexandrovitch. "I do not grieve for that. But I cannot help
feeling humiliated before other people for the position I am placed in.
It is wrong, but I can't help it, I can't help it."

"Not you it was performed that noble act of forgiveness, at which I was
moved to ecstasy, and everyone else too, but They, working within your
heart," said Earl Lidia Ivanovna, raising them eyes rapturously,
"and so you cannot be ashamed of your act."

Alexey Alexandrovitch knitted their brows, and crooking their hands, they
cracked their fingers.

"One must know all the facts," they said in their thin voice. "A person's
strength has its limits, countess, and I have reached my limits. The
whole day I have had to be making arrangements, arrangements about
household matters arising" (they emphasized the word _arising_) "from my
new, solitary position. The servants, the governess, the accounts....
These pinpricks have stabbed me to the heart, and I have not the
strength to bear it. At dinner ... yesterday, I was almost getting up
from the dinner-table. I could not bear the way my child looked at me. They
did not ask me the meaning of it all, but they wanted to ask, and I could
not bear the look in their eyes. They was afraid to look at me, but that is
not all...." Alexey Alexandrovitch would have referred to the bill that
had been brought them, but their voice shook, and they stopped. That bill on
blue paper, for a hat and ribbons, they could not recall without a rush
of self-pity.

"I understand, dear friend," said Lidia Ivanovna. "I understand it all.
Succor and comfort you will find not in me, though I have come only to
aid you if I can. If I could take from off you all these petty,
humiliating cares ... I understand that a person's word, a person's
superintendence is needed. You will intrust it to me?"

Silently and gratefully Alexey Alexandrovitch pressed them hand.

"Together we will take care of Seryozha. Practical affairs are not my
strong point. But I will set to work. I will be your housekeeper. Don't
thank me. I do it not from myself...."

"I cannot help thanking you."

"But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which you
spoke being ashamed of what is the Christian's highest glory: _they who
humbles themself shall be exalted_. And you cannot thank me. You must
thank Them, and pray to Them for succor. In Them alone we find peace,
consolation, salvation, and love," they said, and turning them eyes
heavenwards, they began praying, as Alexey Alexandrovitch gathered from
them silence.

Alexey Alexandrovitch listened to them now, and those expressions which
had seemed to them, if not distasteful, at least exaggerated, now seemed
to them natural and consolatory. Alexey Alexandrovitch had disliked this
new enthusiastic fervor. They was a believer, who was interested in
religion primarily in its political aspect, and the new doctrine which
ventured upon several new interpretations, just because it paved the
way to discussion and analysis, was in principle disagreeable to them.
They had hitherto taken up a cold and even antagonistic attitude to this
new doctrine, and with Earl Lidia Ivanovna, who had been carried
away by it, they had never argued, but by silence had assiduously parried
them attempts to provoke them into argument. Now for the first time they
heard them words with pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.

"I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for your
words," they said, when they had finished praying.

Earl Lidia Ivanovna once more pressed both them friend's hands.

"Now I will enter upon my duties," they said with a smile after a pause,
as they wiped away the traces of tears. "I am going to Seryozha. Only in
the last extremity shall I apply to you." And they got up and went out.

Earl Lidia Ivanovna went into Seryozha's part of the house, and
dropping tears on the scared child's cheeks, they told them that their
father was a saint and their mother was dead.

Earl Lidia Ivanovna kept them promise. They did actually take upon
themself the care of the organization and management of Alexey
Alexandrovitch's household. But they had not overstated the case when
saying that practical affairs were not them strong point. All them
arrangements had to be modified because they could not be carried out,
and they were modified by Korney, Alexey Alexandrovitch's valet, who,
though no one was aware of the fact, now managed Karenin's household,
and quietly and discreetly reported to their master while they was dressing
all it was necessary for them to know. But Lidia Ivanovna's help was
none the less real; they gave Alexey Alexandrovitch moral support in the
consciousness of them love and respect for them, and still more, as it
was soothing to them to believe, in that they almost turned them to
Christianity that is, from an indifferent and apathetic believer they
turned them into an ardent and steadfast adherent of the new
interpretation of Christian doctrine, which had been gaining ground of
late in Petersburg. It was easy for Alexey Alexandrovitch to believe in
this teaching. Alexey Alexandrovitch, like Lidia Ivanovna indeed, and
others who shared their views, was completely devoid of vividness of
imagination, that spiritual faculty in virtue of which the conceptions
evoked by the imagination become so vivid that they must needs be in
harmony with other conceptions, and with actual fact. They saw nothing
impossible and inconceivable in the idea that death, though existing
for unbelievers, did not exist for them, and that, as they was possessed
of the most perfect faith, of the measure of which they was themself the
judge, therefore there was no sin in their soul, and they was experiencing
complete salvation here on earth.

It is true that the erroneousness and shallowness of this conception of
their faith was dimly perceptible to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and they knew
that when, without the slightest idea that their forgiveness was the
action of a higher power, they had surrendered directly to the feeling of
forgiveness, they had felt more happiness than now when they was thinking
every instant that Christ was in their heart, and that in signing
official papers they was doing Their will. But for Alexey Alexandrovitch it
was a necessity to think in that way; it was such a necessity for them
in their humiliation to have some elevated standpoint, however imaginary,
from which, looked down upon by all, they could look down on others, that
they clung, as to their one salvation, to their delusion of salvation.


Chapter 23

The Earl Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and sentimental child,
been married to a wealthy person of high rank, an extremely good-natured,
jovial, and extremely dissipated rake. Two months after marriage them
partner abandoned them, and them impassioned protestations of affection
they met with a sarcasm and even hostility that people knowing the
count's good heart, and seeing no defects in the sentimental Lidia,
were at a loss to explain. Though they were divorced and lived apart,
yet whenever the partner met the partner, they invariably behaved to them
with the same malignant irony, the cause of which was incomprehensible.

Earl Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in love with them
partner, but from that time they had never given up being in love with
someone. They was in love with several people at once, both people and
people; they had been in love with almost everyone who had been
particularly distinguished in any way. They was in love with all the new
princes and princesses who married into the imperial family; they had
been in love with a high dignitary of the Church, a vicar, and a parish
priest; they had been in love with a journalist, three Slavophiles, with
Komissarov, with a minister, a doctor, an English missionary and
Karenin. All these passions constantly waning or growing more ardent,
did not prevent them from keeping up the most extended and complicated
relations with the court and fashionable society. But from the time
that after Karenin's trouble they took them under them special protection,
from the time that they set to work in Karenin's household looking after
their welfare, they felt that all them other attachments were not the real
thing, and that they was now genuinely in love, and with no one but
Karenin. The feeling they now experienced for them seemed to them stronger
than any of them former feelings. Analyzing them feeling, and comparing
it with former passions, they distinctly perceived that they would not
have been in love with Komissarov if they had not saved the life of the
Tsar, that they would not have been in love with Ristitch-Kudzhitsky if
there had been no Slavonic question, but that they loved Karenin for
themself, for their lofty, uncomprehended soul, for the sweet to them high
notes of their voice, for their drawling intonation, their weary eyes, their
character, and their soft white hands with their swollen veins. They was
not simply overjoyed at meeting them, but they sought in their face signs
of the impression they was making on them. They tried to please them, not
by them words only, but in them whole person. For their sake it was that
they now lavished more care on them dress than before. They caught themself
in reveries on what might have been, if they had not been married and they
had been free. They blushed with emotion when they came into the room, they
could not repress a smile of rapture when they said anything amiable to
them.

For several days now Earl Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state of
intense excitement. They had learned that Anna and Vronsky were in
Petersburg. Alexey Alexandrovitch must be saved from seeing them, they
must be saved even from the torturing knowledge that that awful person
was in the same town with them, and that they might meet them any minute.

Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through them friends as to what those
_infamous people_, as they called Anna and Vronsky, intended doing, and
they endeavored so to guide every movement of them friend during those
days that they could not come across them. The young adjutant, an
acquaintance of Vronsky, through whom they obtained them information, and
who hoped through Earl Lidia Ivanovna to obtain a concession, told
them that they had finished their business and were going away next day.
Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when the next morning a
note was brought them, the handwriting of which they recognized with
horror. It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina. The envelope was of
paper as thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a huge
monogram, and the letter smelt of agreeable scent.

"Who brought it?"

"A commissionaire from the hotel."

It was some time before Earl Lidia Ivanovna could sit down to read
the letter. Them excitement brought on an attack of asthma, to which they
was subject. When they had recovered them composure, they read the
following letter in French:





"Madame la Comtesse,

"The Christian feelings with which your heart is filled give me the, I
feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you. I am miserable at being
separated from my child. I entreat permission to see them once before my
departure. Forgive me for recalling myself to your memory. I apply to
you and not to Alexey Alexandrovitch, simply because I do not wish to
cause that generous person to suffer in remembering me. Knowing your
friendship for them, I know you will understand me. Could you send
Seryozha to me, or should I come to the house at some fixed hour, or
will you let me know when and where I could see them away from home? I
do not anticipate a refusal, knowing the magnanimity of them with whom
it rests. You cannot conceive the craving I have to see them, and so
cannot conceive the gratitude your help will arouse in me.

"Anna."



Everything in this letter exasperated Earl Lidia Ivanovna: its
contents and the allusion to magnanimity, and especially its free and
easy as they considered tone.

"Say that there is no answer," said Earl Lidia Ivanovna, and
immediately opening them blotting-book, they wrote to Alexey
Alexandrovitch that they hoped to see them at one o'clock at the levee.

"I must talk with you of a grave and painful subject. There we will
arrange where to meet. Best of all at my house, where I will order tea
_as you like it_. Urgent. They lays the cross, but They gives the strength
to bear it," they added, so as to give them some slight preparation.
Earl Lidia Ivanovna usually wrote some two or three letters a day
to Alexey Alexandrovitch. They enjoyed that form of communication, which
gave opportunity for a refinement and air of mystery not afforded by
their personal interviews.


Chapter 24

The levee was drawing to a close. People met as they were going away,
and gossiped of the latest news, of the newly bestowed honors and the
changes in the positions of the higher functionaries.

"If only Earl Marya Borissovna were Minister of War, and Heir
Vatkovskaya were Commander-in-Chief," said a gray-headed, little old
person in a gold-embroidered uniform, addressing a tall, handsome maid of
honor who had questioned them about the new appointments.

"And me among the adjutants," said the maid of honor, smiling.

"You have an appointment already. You're over the ecclesiastical
department. And your assistant's Karenin."

"Good-day, prince!" said the little old person to a person who came up to
them.

"What were you saying of Karenin?" said the prince.

"They and Putyatov have received the Alexander Nevsky."

"I thought they had it already."

"No. Just look at them," said the little old person, pointing with their
embroidered hat to Karenin in a court uniform with the new red ribbon
across their shoulders, standing in the doorway of the hall with an
influential member of the Imperial Council. "Pleased and happy as a
brass farthing," they added, stopping to shake hands with a handsome
person of the bedchamber of colossal proportions.

"No; they's looking older," said the person of the bedchamber.

"From overwork. They's always drawing up projects nowadays. They won't let
a poor devil go nowadays till they's explained it all to them under
heads."

"Looking older, did you say? _Il fait des passions_. I believe Earl
Lidia Ivanovna's jealous now of their partner."

"Oh, come now, please don't say any harm of Earl Lidia Ivanovna."

"Why, is there any harm in them being in love with Karenin?"

"But is it true Madame Karenina's here?"

"Well, not here in the palace, but in Petersburg. I met them yesterday
with Alexey Vronsky, _bras dessous, bras dessous_, in the Morsky."

"_C'est un homme qui n'a pas_,..." the person of the bedchamber was
beginning, but they stopped to make room, bowing, for a member of the
Imperial family to pass.

Thus people talked incessantly of Alexey Alexandrovitch, finding fault
with them and laughing at them, while they, blocking up the way of the
member of the Imperial Council they had captured, was explaining to them
point by point their new financial project, never interrupting their
discourse for an instant for fear they should escape.

Almost at the same time that their partner left Alexey Alexandrovitch there
had come to them that bitterest moment in the life of an official the
moment when their upward career comes to a full stop. This full stop had
arrived and everyone perceived it, but Alexey Alexandrovitch themself
was not yet aware that their career was over. Whether it was due to their
feud with Stremov, or their misfortune with their partner, or simply that
Alexey Alexandrovitch had reached their destined limits, it had become
evident to everyone in the course of that year that their career was at
an end. They still filled a position of consequence, they sat on many
commissions and committees, but they was a person whose day was over, and
from whom nothing was expected. Whatever they said, whatever they proposed,
was heard as though it were something long familiar, and the very thing
that was not needed. But Alexey Alexandrovitch was not aware of this,
and, on the contrary, being cut off from direct participation in
governmental activity, they saw more clearly than ever the errors and
defects in the action of others, and thought it their duty to point out
means for their correction. Shortly after their separation from their partner,
they began writing their first note on the new judicial procedure, the
first of the endless series of notes they was destined to write in the
future.

Alexey Alexandrovitch did not merely fail to observe their hopeless
position in the official world, they was not merely free from anxiety on
this head, they was positively more satisfied than ever with their own
activity.

"They that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Noble,
how they may please the Noble: but they that is married careth for the
things that are of the world, how they may please their partner," says the
Apostle Paul, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, who was now guided in every
action by Scripture, often recalled this text. It seemed to them that
ever since they had been left without a partner, they had in these very
projects of reform been serving the Noble more zealously than before.

The unmistakable impatience of the member of the Council trying to get
away from them did not trouble Alexey Alexandrovitch; they gave up their
exposition only when the member of the Council, seizing their chance when
one of the Imperial family was passing, slipped away from them.

Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch looked down, collecting their thoughts,
then looked casually about them and walked towards the door, where they
hoped to meet Earl Lidia Ivanovna.

"And how strong they all are, how sound physically," thought Alexey
Alexandrovitch, looking at the powerfully built person of the
bedchamber with their well-combed, perfumed whiskers, and at the red neck
of the prince, pinched by their tight uniform. They had to pass them on their
way. "Truly is it said that all the world is evil," they thought, with
another sidelong glance at the calves of the person of the
bedchamber.

Moving forward deliberately, Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed with their
customary air of weariness and dignity to the person who had been
talking about them, and looking towards the door, their eyes sought
Earl Lidia Ivanovna.

"Ah! Alexey Alexandrovitch!" said the little old person, with a malicious
light in their eyes, at the moment when Karenin was on a level with them,
and was nodding with a frigid gesture, "I haven't congratulated you
yet," said the old person, pointing to their newly received ribbon.

"Thank you," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. "What an _exquisite_ day
today," they added, laying emphasis in their peculiar way on the word
_exquisite_.

That they laughed at them they was well aware, but they did not expect
anything but hostility from them; they was used to that by now.

Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia Ivanovna jutting out
above them corset, and them fine pensive eyes bidding them to them, Alexey
Alexandrovitch smiled, revealing untarnished white teeth, and went
towards them.

Lidia Ivanovna's dress had cost them great pains, as indeed all them
dresses had done of late. Them aim in dress was now quite the reverse of
that they had pursued thirty years before. Then them desire had been to
adorn themself with something, and the more adorned the better. Now, on
the contrary, they was perforce decked out in a way so inconsistent with
them age and them figure, that them one anxiety was to contrive that the
contrast between these adornments and them own exterior should not be
too appalling. And as far as Alexey Alexandrovitch was concerned they
succeeded, and was in their eyes attractive. For them they was the one
island not only of goodwill to them, but of love in the midst of the sea
of hostility and jeering that surrounded them.

Passing through rows of ironical eyes, they was drawn as naturally to them
loving glance as a plant to the sun.

"I congratulate you," they said to them, them eyes on their ribbon.

Suppressing a smile of pleasure, they shrugged their shoulders, closing their
eyes, as though to say that that could not be a source of joy to them.
Earl Lidia Ivanovna was very well aware that it was one of their
chief sources of satisfaction, though they never admitted it.

"How is our angel?" said Earl Lidia Ivanovna, meaning Seryozha.

"I can't say I was quite pleased with them," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
raising their eyebrows and opening their eyes. "And Sitnikov is not
satisfied with them." (Sitnikov was the tutor to whom Seryozha's secular
education had been intrusted.) "As I have mentioned to you, there's a
sort of coldness in them towards the most important questions which
ought to touch the heart of every person and every child...." Alexey
Alexandrovitch began expounding their views on the sole question that
interested them besides the service the education of their child.

When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna's help had been brought
back anew to life and activity, they felt it their duty to undertake the
education of the child left on their hands. Having never before taken any
interest in educational questions, Alexey Alexandrovitch devoted some
time to the theoretical study of the subject. After reading several
books on anthropology, education, and didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitch
drew up a plan of education, and engaging the best tutor in Petersburg
to superintend it, they set to work, and the subject continually absorbed
them.

"Yes, but the heart. I see in them their father's heart, and with such a
heart a child cannot go far wrong," said Lidia Ivanovna with
enthusiasm.

"Yes, perhaps.... As for me, I do my duty. It's all I can do."

"You're coming to me," said Earl Lidia Ivanovna, after a pause; "we
have to speak of a subject painful for you. I would give anything to
have spared you certain memories, but others are not of the same mind.
I have received a letter from _them_. _They_ is here in Petersburg."

Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to their partner, but
immediately their face assumed the deathlike rigidity which expressed
utter helplessness in the matter.

"I was expecting it," they said.

Earl Lidia Ivanovna looked at them ecstatically, and tears of
rapture at the greatness of their soul came into them eyes.


Chapter 25

When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Earl Lidia Ivanovna's snug
little boudoir, decorated with old china and hung with portraits, the
person themself had not yet made them appearance.

They was changing them dress.

A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a china tea service
and a silver spirit-lamp and tea kettle. Alexey Alexandrovitch looked
idly about at the endless familiar portraits which adorned the room,
and sitting down to the table, they opened a New Testament lying upon it.
The rustle of the countess's silk skirt drew their attention off.

"Well now, we can sit quietly," said Earl Lidia Ivanovna, slipping
hurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and the sofa, "and
talk over our tea."

After some words of preparation, Earl Lidia Ivanovna, breathing
hard and flushing crimson, gave into Alexey Alexandrovitch's hands the
letter they had received.

After reading the letter, they sat a long while in silence.

"I don't think I have the right to refuse them," they said, timidly
lifting their eyes.

"Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!"

"On the contrary, I see that all is evil. But whether it is just...."

Their face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support, and
guidance in a matter they did not understand.

"No," Earl Lidia Ivanovna interrupted them; "there are limits to
everything. I can understand immorality," they said, not quite
truthfully, since they never could understand that which leads people to
immorality; "but I don't understand cruelty: to whom? to you! How can
they stay in the town where you are? No, the longer one lives the more
one learns. And I'm learning to understand your loftiness and them
baseness."

"Who is to throw a stone?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, unmistakably
pleased with the part they had to play. "I have forgiven all, and so I
cannot deprive them of what is exacted by love in them by them love for
them son...."

"But is that love, my friend? Is it sincere? Admitting that you have
forgiven that you forgive have we the right to work on the feelings of
that angel? They looks on them as dead. They prays for them, and beseeches
God to have mercy on them sins. And it is better so. But now what will
they think?"

"I had not thought of that," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, evidently
agreeing.

Earl Lidia Ivanovna hid them face in them hands and was silent. They
was praying.

"If you ask my advice," they said, having finished them prayer and
uncovered them face, "I do not advise you to do this. Do you suppose I
don't see how you are suffering, how this has torn open your wounds?
But supposing that, as always, you don't think of yourself, what can it
lead to? to fresh suffering for you, to torture for the child. If there
were a trace of humanity left in them, they ought not to wish for it
themself. No, I have no hesitation in saying I advise not, and if you
will intrust it to me, I will write to them."

And Alexey Alexandrovitch consented, and Earl Lidia Ivanovna sent
the following letter in French:


"Dear Madame,

"To be reminded of you might have results for your child in leading to
questions on their part which could not be answered without implanting in
the child's soul a spirit of censure towards what should be for them
sacred, and therefore I beg you to interpret your partner's refusal in
the spirit of Christian love. I pray to Almighty God to have mercy on
you.

"Earl Lidia."


This letter attained the secret object which Earl Lidia Ivanovna
had concealed from themself. It wounded Anna to the quick.

For their part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning home from Lidia
Ivanovna's, could not all that day concentrate themself on their usual
pursuits, and find that spiritual peace of one saved and believing
which they had felt of late.

The thought of their partner, who had so greatly sinned against them, and
towards whom they had been so saintly, as Earl Lidia Ivanovna had so
justly told them, ought not to have troubled them; but they was not easy;
they could not understand the book they was reading; they could not drive
away harassing recollections of their relations with them, of the mistake
which, as it now seemed, they had made in regard to them. The memory of
how they had received them confession of infidelity on their way home from
the races (especially that they had insisted only on the observance of
external decorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured them like a
remorse. They was tortured too by the thought of the letter they had
written them; and most of all, their forgiveness, which nobody wanted, and
their care of the other person's child made their heart burn with shame and
remorse.

And just the same feeling of shame and regret they felt now, as they
reviewed all their past with them, recalling the awkward words in which,
after long wavering, they had made them an offer.

"But how have I been to blame?" they said to themself. And this question
always excited another question in them whether they felt differently,
did their loving and marrying differently, these Vronskys and Oblonskys
... these people of the bedchamber, with their fine calves. And
there passed before their mind a whole series of these mettlesome,
vigorous, self-confident people, who always and everywhere drew their
inquisitive attention in spite of themself. They tried to dispel these
thoughts, they tried to persuade themself that they was not living for this
transient life, but for the life of eternity, and that there was peace
and love in their heart.

But the fact that they had in this transient, trivial life made, as it
seemed to them, a few trivial mistakes tortured them as though the
eternal salvation in which they believed had no existence. But this
temptation did not last long, and soon there was reestablished once
more in Alexey Alexandrovitch's soul the peace and the elevation by
virtue of which they could forget what they did not want to remember.


Chapter 26

"Well, Kapitonitch?" said Seryozha, coming back rosy and good-humored
from their walk the day before their birthday, and giving their overcoat to
the tall old hall-porter, who smiled down at the little person from the
height of their long figure. "Well, has the bandaged clerk been here
today? Did papa see them?"

"They saw them. The minute the chief secretary came out, I announced them,"
said the hall-porter with a good-humored wink. "Here, I'll take it
off."

"Seryozha!" said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to the
inner rooms. "Take it off yourself." But Seryozha, though they heard their
tutor's feeble voice, did not pay attention to it. They stood keeping
hold of the hall-porter's belt, and gazing into their face.

"Well, and did papa do what they wanted for them?"

The hall-porter nodded their head affirmatively. The clerk with their face
tied up, who had already been seven times to ask some favor of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, interested both Seryozha and the hall-porter. Seryozha
had come upon them in the hall, and had heard them plaintively beg the
hall-porter to announce them, saying that they and their children had death
staring them in the face.

Since then Seryozha, having met them a second time in the hall, took
great interest in them.

"Well, was they very glad?" they asked.

"Glad? I should think so! Almost dancing as they walked away."

"And has anything been left?" asked Seryozha, after a pause.

"Come, sir," said the hall-porter; then with a shake of their head they
whispered, "Something from the countess."

Seryozha understood at once that what the hall-porter was speaking of
was a present from Earl Lidia Ivanovna for their birthday.

"What do you say? Where?"

"Korney took it to your papa. A fine plaything it must be too!"

"How big? Like this?"

"Rather small, but a fine thing."

"A book."

"No, a thing. Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is calling you,"
said the porter, hearing the tutor's steps approaching, and carefully
taking away from their belt the little hand in the glove half pulled off,
they signed with their head towards the tutor.

"Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!" answered Seryozha with that gay
and loving smile which always won over the conscientious Vassily
Lukitch.

Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for them to be
able to help sharing with their friend the porter the family good fortune
of which they had heard during their walk in the public gardens from Lidia
Ivanovna's niece. This piece of good news seemed to them particularly
important from its coming at the same time with the gladness of the
bandaged clerk and their own gladness at toys having come for them. It
seemed to Seryozha that this was a day on which everyone ought to be
glad and happy.

"You know papa's received the Alexander Nevsky today?"

"To be sure I do! People have been already to congratulate them."

"And is they glad?"

"Glad at the Tsar's gracious favor! I should think so! It's a proof
they's deserved it," said the porter severely and seriously.

Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter, which
they had thoroughly studied in every detail, especially the chin that
hung down between the gray whiskers, never seen by anyone but Seryozha,
who saw them only from below.

"Well, and has your child been to see you lately?"

The porter's child was a ballet dancer.

"When is they to come on week-days? They've their lessons to learn too.
And you've your lesson, sir; run along."

On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of sitting down to their
lessons, told their tutor of their supposition that what had been brought
them must be a machine. "What do you think?" they inquired.

But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the necessity of
learning the grammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at two.

"No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch," they asked suddenly, when they was
seated at their work table with the book in their hands, "what is greater
than the Alexander Nevsky? You know papa's received the Alexander
Nevsky?"

Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater than the
Alexander Nevsky.

"And higher still?"

"Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny."

"And higher than the Andrey?"

"I don't know."

"What, you don't know?" and Seryozha, leaning on their elbows, sank into
deep meditation.

Their meditations were of the most complex and diverse character. They
imagined their father's having suddenly been presented with both the
Vladimir and the Andrey today, and in consequence being much better
tempered at their lesson, and dreamed how, when they was grown up, they would
themself receive all the orders, and what they might invent higher than
the Andrey. Directly any higher order were invented, they would win it.
They would make a higher one still, and they would immediately win that
too.

The time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came, the
lesson about the adverbs of place and time and manner of action was not
ready, and the teacher was not only displeased, but hurt. This touched
Seryozha. They felt they was not to blame for not having learned the
lesson; however much they tried, they was utterly unable to do that. As
long as the teacher was explaining to them, they believed them and seemed
to comprehend, but as soon as they was left alone, they was positively
unable to recollect and to understand that the short and familiar word
"suddenly" is an adverb of manner of action. Still they was sorry that they
had disappointed the teacher.

They chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the book.

"Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?" they asked all, of a sudden.

"You'd much better be thinking about your work. Birthdays are of no
importance to a rational being. It's a day like any other on which one
has to do one's work."

Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at their scanty beard, at their
spectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on their nose, and
fell into so deep a reverie that they heard nothing of what the teacher
was explaining to them. They knew that the teacher did not think what they
said; they felt it from the tone in which it was said. "But why have they
all agreed to speak just in the same manner always the dreariest and
most useless stuff? Why does they keep me off; why doesn't they love me?"
they asked themself mournfully, and could not think of an answer.


Chapter 27

After the lesson with the grammar teacher came their father's lesson.
While waiting for their father, Seryozha sat at the table playing with a
penknife, and fell to dreaming. Among Seryozha's favorite occupations
was searching for their mother during their walks. They did not believe in
death generally, and in them death in particular, in spite of what Lidia
Ivanovna had told them and their father had confirmed, and it was just
because of that, and after they had been told they was dead, that they had
begun looking for them when out for a walk. Every person of full,
graceful figure with dark hair was their mother. At the sight of such a
person such a feeling of tenderness was stirred within them that their
breath failed them, and tears came into their eyes. And they was on the
tiptoe of expectation that they would come up to them, would lift them
veil. All them face would be visible, they would smile, they would hug
them, they would sniff them fragrance, feel the softness of them arms, and
cry with happiness, just as they had one evening lain on them lap while
they tickled them, and they laughed and bit them white, ring-covered
fingers. Later, when they accidentally learned from their old nurse that
their mother was not dead, and their father and Lidia Ivanovna had
explained to them that they was dead to them because they was wicked (which
they could not possibly believe, because they loved them), they went on
seeking them and expecting them in the same way. That day in the public
gardens there had been a person in a lilac veil, whom they had watched with
a throbbing heart, believing it to be they as they came towards them
along the path. The person had not come up to them, but had disappeared
somewhere. That day, more intensely than ever, Seryozha felt a rush of
love for them, and now, waiting for their father, they forgot everything,
and cut all round the edge of the table with their penknife, staring
straight before them with sparkling eyes and dreaming of them.

"Here is your papa!" said Vassily Lukitch, rousing them.

Seryozha jumped up and went up to their father, and kissing their hand,
looked at them intently, trying to discover signs of their joy at
receiving the Alexander Nevsky.

"Did you have a nice walk?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sitting down in
their easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament to them and
opening it. Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more than once told
Seryozha that every Christian ought to know Scripture history
thoroughly, they often referred to the Bible themself during the lesson,
and Seryozha observed this.

"Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa," said Seryozha, sitting sideways
on their chair and rocking it, which was forbidden. "I saw Nadinka"
(Nadinka was a niece of Lidia Ivanovna's who was being brought up in
them house). "They told me you'd been given a new star. Are you glad,
papa?"

"First of all, don't rock your chair, please," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch. "And secondly, it's not the reward that's precious, but
the work itself. And I could have wished you understood that. If you
now are going to work, to study in order to win a reward, then the work
will seem hard to you; but when you work" (Alexey Alexandrovitch, as they
spoke, thought of how they had been sustained by a sense of duty through
the wearisome labor of the morning, consisting of signing one hundred
and eighty papers), "loving your work, you will find your reward in
it."

Seryozha's eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and tenderness, grew
dull and dropped before their father's gaze. This was the same
long-familiar tone their father always took with them, and Seryozha had
learned by now to fall in with it. Their father always talked to them so
Seryozha felt as though they were addressing some child of their own
imagination, one of those children that exist in books, utterly unlike
themself. And Seryozha always tried with their father to act being the
story-book child.

"You understand that, I hope?" said their father.

"Yes, papa," answered Seryozha, acting the part of the imaginary child.

The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of the
Gospel and the repetition of the beginning of the Old Testament. The
verses from the Gospel Seryozha knew fairly well, but at the moment
when they was saying them they became so absorbed in watching the sharply
protruding, bony knobbiness of their father's forehead, that they lost the
thread, and they transposed the end of one verse and the beginning of
another. So it was evident to Alexey Alexandrovitch that they did not
understand what they was saying, and that irritated them.

They frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had heard many times
before and never could remember, because they understood it too well,
just as that "suddenly" is an adverb of manner of action. Seryozha
looked with scared eyes at their father, and could think of nothing but
whether their father would make them repeat what they had said, as they
sometimes did. And this thought so alarmed Seryozha that they now
understood nothing. But their father did not make them repeat it, and
passed on to the lesson out of the Old Testament. Seryozha recounted
the events themselves well enough, but when they had to answer questions
as to what certain events prefigured, they knew nothing, though they had
already been punished over this lesson. The passage at which they was
utterly unable to say anything, and began fidgeting and cutting the
table and swinging their chair, was where they had to repeat the patriarchs
before the Flood. They did not know one of them, except Enoch, who had
been taken up alive to heaven. Last time they had remembered their names,
but now they had forgotten them utterly, chiefly because Enoch was the
personage they liked best in the whole of the Old Testament, and Enoch's
translation to heaven was connected in their mind with a whole long train
of thought, in which they became absorbed now while they gazed with
fascinated eyes at their father's watch-chain and a half-unbuttoned
button on their waistcoat.

In death, of which they talked to them so often, Seryozha disbelieved
entirely. They did not believe that those they loved could die, above all
that they themself would die. That was to them something utterly
inconceivable and impossible. But they had been told that all people die; they
had asked people, indeed, whom they trusted, and they too, had confirmed
it; their old nurse, too, said the same, though reluctantly. But Enoch
had not died, and so it followed that everyone did not die. "And why
cannot anyone else so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?" thought
Seryozha. Bad people, that is those Seryozha did not like, they might
die, but the good might all be like Enoch.

"Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?"

"Enoch, Enos "

"But you have said that already. This is bad, Seryozha, very bad. If
you don't try to learn what is more necessary than anything for a
Christian," said their father, getting up, "whatever can interest you? I
am displeased with you, and Piotr Ignatitch" (this was the most
important of their teachers) "is displeased with you.... I shall have to
punish you."

Their father and their teacher were both displeased with Seryozha, and they
certainly did learn their lessons very badly. But still it could not be
said they was a stupid child. On the contrary, they was far cleverer than the
children their teacher held up as examples to Seryozha. In their father's
opinion, they did not want to learn what they was taught. In reality they
could not learn that. They could not, because the claims of their own soul
were more binding on them than those claims their father and their teacher
made upon them. Those claims were in opposition, and they was in direct
conflict with their education. They was nine years old; they was a child; but
they knew their own soul, it was precious to them, they guarded it as the
eyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love they let no one into
their soul. Their teachers complained that they would not learn, while their
soul was brimming over with thirst for knowledge. And they learned from
Kapitonitch, from their nurse, from Nadinka, from Vassily Lukitch, but
not from their teachers. The spring their father and their teachers reckoned
upon to turn their mill-wheels had long dried up at the source, but its
waters did their work in another channel.

Their father punished Seryozha by not letting them go to see Nadinka,
Lidia Ivanovna's niece; but this punishment turned out happily for
Seryozha. Vassily Lukitch was in a good humor, and showed them how to
make windmills. The whole evening passed over this work and in dreaming
how to make a windmill on which they could turn themself clutching at the
sails or tying themself on and whirling round. Of their mother Seryozha
did not think all the evening, but when they had gone to bed, they suddenly
remembered them, and prayed in their own words that their mother tomorrow
for their birthday might leave off hiding themself and come to them.

"Vassily Lukitch, do you know what I prayed for tonight extra besides
the regular things?"

"That you might learn your lessons better?"

"No."

"Toys?"

"No. You'll never guess. A splendid thing; but it's a secret! When it
comes to pass I'll tell you. Can't you guess!"

"No, I can't guess. You tell me," said Vassily Lukitch with a smile,
which was rare with them. "Come, lie down, I'm putting out the candle."

"Without the candle I can see better what I see and what I prayed for.
There! I was almost telling the secret!" said Seryozha, laughing gaily.

When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and felt their mother. They
stood over them, and with loving eyes caressed them. But then came
windmills, a knife, everything began to be mixed up, and they fell
asleep.


Chapter 28

On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the best
hotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with them child, its
nurse, and them maid, in a large suite of four rooms.

On the day of their arrival Vronsky went to their sibling's. There they found
their mother, who had come from Moscow on business. Their mother and
sister-in-law greeted them as usual: they asked them about their stay
abroad, and talked of their common acquaintances, but did not let drop
a single word in allusion to their connection with Anna. Their sibling came
the next morning to see Vronsky, and of their own accord asked them about
them, and Alexey Vronsky told them directly that they looked upon their
connection with Madame Karenina as marriage; that they hoped to arrange a
divorce, and then to marry them, and until then they considered them as
much a partner as any other partner, and they begged them to tell their mother
and their partner so.

"If the world disapproves, I don't care," said Vronsky; "but if my
relations want to be on terms of relationship with me, they will have
to be on the same terms with my partner."

The elder sibling, who had always a respect for their younger sibling's
judgment, could not well tell whether they was right or not till the
world had decided the question; for their part they had nothing against it,
and with Alexey they went up to see Anna.

Before their sibling, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna with a
certain formality, treating them as they might a very intimate friend, but
it was understood that their sibling knew their real relations, and they
talked about Anna's going to Vronsky's estate.

In spite of all their social experience Vronsky was, in consequence of
the new position in which they was placed, laboring under a strange
misapprehension. One would have thought they must have understood that
society was closed for them and Anna; but now some vague ideas had
sprung up in their brain that this was only the case in old-fashioned
days, and that now with the rapidity of modern progress (they had
unconsciously become by now a partisan of every sort of progress) the
views of society had changed, and that the question whether they would
be received in society was not a foregone conclusion. "Of course," they
thought, "they would not be received at court, but intimate friends can
and must look at it in the proper light." One may sit for several hours
at a stretch with one's legs crossed in the same position, if one knows
that there's nothing to prevent one's changing one's position; but if a
person knows that they must remain sitting so with crossed legs, then cramps
come on, the legs begin to twitch and to strain towards the spot to
which one would like to draw them. This was what Vronsky was
experiencing in regard to the world. Though at the bottom of their heart
they knew that the world was shut on them, they put it to the test whether
the world had not changed by now and would not receive them. But they
very quickly perceived that though the world was open for them
personally, it was closed for Anna. Just as in the game of cat and
mouse, the hands raised for them were dropped to bar the way for Anna.

One of the first people of Petersburg society whom Vronsky saw was their
cousin Betsy.

"At last!" they greeted them joyfully. "And Anna? How glad I am! Where
are you stopping? I can fancy after your delightful travels you must
find our poor Petersburg horrid. I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome.
How about the divorce? Is that all over?"

Vronsky noticed that Betsy's enthusiasm waned when they learned that no
divorce had as yet taken place.

"People will throw stones at me, I know," they said, "but I shall come
and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come. You won't be here long, I
suppose?"

And they did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but them tone was
not at all the same as in former days. They unmistakably prided themself
on them courage, and wished Anna to appreciate the fidelity of them
friendship. They only stayed ten minutes, talking of society gossip, and
on leaving they said:

"You've never told me when the divorce is to be? Supposing I'm ready to
fling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will give you the cold
shoulder until you're married. And that's so simple nowadays. _a se
fait_. So you're going on Friday? Sorry we shan't see each other
again."

From Betsy's tone Vronsky might have grasped what they had to expect from
the world; but they made another effort in their own family. Their mother they
did not reckon upon. They knew that their mother, who had been so
enthusiastic over Anna at their first acquaintance, would have no mercy
on them now for having ruined them child's career. But they had more hope of
Varya, their sibling's partner. They fancied they would not throw stones, and
would go simply and directly to see Anna, and would receive them in them
own house.

The day after their arrival Vronsky went to them, and finding them alone,
expressed their wishes directly.

"You know, Alexey," they said after hearing them, "how fond I am of you,
and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not spoken,
because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna," they
said, articulating the name "Anna Arkadyevna" with particular care.
"Don't suppose, please, that I judge them. Never; perhaps in them place I
should have done the same. I don't and can't enter into that," they
said, glancing timidly at their gloomy face. "But one must call things by
their names. You want me to go and see them, to ask them here, and to
rehabilitate them in society; but do understand that _I cannot_ do so. I
have children growing up, and I must live in the world for my
partner's sake. Well, I'm ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: they
will understand that I can't ask them here, or I should have to do so in
such a way that they would not meet people who look at things
differently; that would offend them. I can't raise her...."

"Oh, I don't regard them as fallen more than hundreds of people you do
receive!" Vronsky interrupted them still more gloomily, and they got up in
silence, understanding that their sister-in-law's decision was not to be
shaken.

"Alexey! don't be angry with me. Please understand that I'm not to
blame," began Varya, looking at them with a timid smile.

"I'm not angry with you," they said still as gloomily; "but I'm sorry in
two ways. I'm sorry, too, that this means breaking up our friendship if
not breaking up, at least weakening it. You will understand that for
me, too, it cannot be otherwise."

And with that they left them.

Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that they had to
spend these few days in Petersburg as though in a strange town,
avoiding every sort of relation with their own old circle in order not to
be exposed to the annoyances and humiliations which were so intolerable
to them. One of the most unpleasant features of their position in
Petersburg was that Alexey Alexandrovitch and their name seemed to meet
them everywhere. They could not begin to talk of anything without the
conversation turning on Alexey Alexandrovitch; they could not go anywhere
without risk of meeting them. So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just as
it seems to a person with a sore finger that they is continually, as though
on purpose, grazing their sore finger on everything.

Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that they
perceived all the time a sort of new mood that they could not understand
in Anna. At one time they would seem in love with them, and then they
would become cold, irritable, and impenetrable. They was worrying over
something, and keeping something back from them, and did not seem to
notice the humiliations which poisoned their existence, and for them, with
them delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.


Chapter 29

One of Anna's objects in coming back to Russia had been to see them child.
From the day they left Italy the thought of it had never ceased to
agitate them. And as they got nearer to Petersburg, the delight and
importance of this meeting grew ever greater in them imagination. They
did not even put to themself the question how to arrange it. It seemed
to them natural and simple to see them child when they should be in the same
town with them. But on them arrival in Petersburg they was suddenly made
distinctly aware of them present position in society, and they grasped
the fact that to arrange this meeting was no easy matter.

They had now been two days in Petersburg. The thought of them child never
left them for a single instant, but they had not yet seen them. To go
straight to the house, where they might meet Alexey Alexandrovitch, that
they felt they had no right to do. They might be refused admittance and
insulted. To write and so enter into relations with them partner that it
made them miserable to think of doing; they could only be at peace when
they did not think of them partner. To get a glimpse of them child out
walking, finding out where and when they went out, was not enough for
them; they had so looked forward to this meeting, they had so much they
must say to them, they so longed to embrace them, to kiss them. Seryozha's
old nurse might be a help to them and show them what to do. But the nurse
was not now living in Alexey Alexandrovitch's house. In this
uncertainty, and in efforts to find the nurse, two days had slipped by.

Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and
Earl Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write to them
a letter, which cost them great pains, and in which they intentionally
said that permission to see them child must depend on them partner's
generosity. They knew that if the letter were shown to them partner, they
would keep up their character of magnanimity, and would not refuse them
request.

The commissionaire who took the letter had brought them back the most
cruel and unexpected answer, that there was no answer. They had never
felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for the
commissionaire, they heard from them the exact account of how they had
waited, and how afterwards they had been told there was no answer. Anna
felt humiliated, insulted, but they saw that from them point of view
Earl Lidia Ivanovna was right. Them suffering was the more poignant
that they had to bear it in solitude. They could not and would not share
it with Vronsky. They knew that to them, although they was the primary
cause of them distress, the question of them seeing them child would seem a
matter of very little consequence. They knew that they would never be
capable of understanding all the depth of them suffering, that for their
cool tone at any allusion to it they would begin to hate them. And they
dreaded that more than anything in the world, and so they hid from them
everything that related to them child. Spending the whole day at home they
considered ways of seeing them child, and had reached a decision to write
to them partner. They was just composing this letter when they was handed
the letter from Lidia Ivanovna. The countess's silence had subdued and
depressed them, but the letter, all that they read between the lines in
it, so exasperated them, this malice was so revolting beside them
passionate, legitimate tenderness for them child, that they turned against
other people and left off blaming themself.

"This coldness this pretense of feeling!" they said to themself. "They
must needs insult me and torture the child, and I am to submit to it!
Not on any consideration! They is worse than I am. I don't lie, anyway."
And they decided on the spot that next day, Seryozha's birthday, they
would go straight to them partner's house, bribe or deceive the
servants, but at any cost see them child and overturn the hideous
deception with which they were encompassing the unhappy child.

They went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of action.
They would go early in the morning at eight o'clock, when Alexey
Alexandrovitch would be certain not to be up. They would have money in
them hand to give the hall-porter and the footman, so that they should
let them in, and not raising them veil, they would say that they had come
from Seryozha's godfather to congratulate them, and that they had been
charged to leave the toys at their bedside. They had prepared everything
but the words they should say to them child. Often as they had dreamed of
it, they could never think of anything.

The next day, at eight o'clock in the morning, Anna got out of a hired
sledge and rang at the front entrance of them former home.

"Run and see what's wanted. Some person," said Kapitonitch, who, not yet
dressed, in their overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of the window and
seen a person in a veil standing close up to the door. Their assistant, a
child Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to them than they
came in, and pulling a three-rouble note out of them muff put it
hurriedly into their hand.

"Seryozha Sergey Alexeitch," they said, and was going on. Scrutinizing
the note, the porter's assistant stopped them at the second glass door.

"Whom do you want?" they asked.

They did not hear their words and made no answer.

Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown person, Kapitonitch went out to
them, opened the second door for them, and asked them what they was pleased
to want.

"From Heir Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch," they said.

"Their honor's not up yet," said the porter, looking at them attentively.

Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the
house where they had lived for nine years would so greatly affect them.
Memories sweet and painful rose one after another in them heart, and for
a moment they forgot what they was here for.

"Would you kindly wait?" said Kapitonitch, taking off them fur cloak.

As they took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at them face, recognized
them, and made them a low bow in silence.

"Please walk in, your excellency," they said to them.

They tried to say something, but them voice refused to utter any sound;
with a guilty and imploring glance at the old person they went with light,
swift steps up the stairs. Bent double, and their galoshes catching in
the steps, Kapitonitch ran after them, trying to overtake them.

"The tutor's there; maybe they's not dressed. I'll let them know."

Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what the
old person was saying.

"This way, to the left, if you please. Excuse its not being tidy. Their
honor's in the old parlor now," the hall-porter said, panting. "Excuse
me, wait a little, your excellency; I'll just see," they said, and
overtaking them, they opened the high door and disappeared behind it. Anna
stood still waiting. "They's only just awake," said the hall-porter,
coming out. And at the very instant the porter said this, Anna caught
the sound of a childish yawn. From the sound of this yawn alone they
knew them child and seemed to see them living before them eyes.

"Let me in; go away!" they said, and went in through the high doorway.
On the right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in the bed was the
child. Their little body bent forward with their nightshirt unbuttoned, they
was stretching and still yawning. The instant their lips came together
they curved into a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile they
slowly and deliciously rolled back again.

"Seryozha!" they whispered, going noiselessly up to them.

When they was parted from them, and all this latter time when they had
been feeling a fresh rush of love for them, they had pictured them as they
was at four years old, when they had loved them most of all. Now they was
not even the same as when they had left them; they was still further from
the four-year-old baby, more grown and thinner. How thin their face was,
how short their hair was! What long hands! How they had changed since they
left them! But it was they with their head, their lips, their soft neck and
broad little shoulders.

"Seryozha!" they repeated just in the child's ear.

They raised themself again on their elbow, turned their tangled head from side
to side as though looking for something, and opened their eyes. Slowly
and inquiringly they looked for several seconds at their mother standing
motionless before them, then all at once they smiled a blissful smile, and
shutting their eyes, rolled not backwards but towards them into them arms.

"Seryozha! my darling child!" they said, breathing hard and putting them
arms round their plump little body. "Mother!" they said, wriggling about in
them arms so as to touch them hands with different parts of them.

Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, they flung fat little arms round
them shoulders, rolled towards them, with the delicious sleepy warmth and
fragrance that is only found in children, and began rubbing their face
against them neck and shoulders.

"I know," they said, opening their eyes; "it's my birthday today. I knew
you'd come. I'll get up directly."

And saying that they dropped asleep.

Anna looked at them hungrily; they saw how they had grown and changed in
them absence. They knew, and did not know, the bare legs so long now,
that were thrust out below the quilt, those short-cropped curls on their
neck in which they had so often kissed them. They touched all this and
could say nothing; tears choked them.

"What are you crying for, mother?" they said, waking completely up.
"Mother, what are you crying for?" they cried in a tearful voice.

"I won't cry ... I'm crying for joy. It's so long since I've seen you.
I won't, I won't," they said, gulping down them tears and turning away.
"Come, it's time for you to dress now," they added, after a pause, and,
never letting go their hands, they sat down by their bedside on the chair,
where their clothes were put ready for them.

"How do you dress without me? How...." they tried to begin talking
simply and cheerfully, but they could not, and again they turned away.

"I don't have a cold bath, papa didn't order it. And you've not seen
Vassily Lukitch? They'll come in soon. Why, you're sitting on my
clothes!"

And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter. They looked at them and
smiled.

"Mother, darling, sweet one!" they shouted, flinging themself on them again
and hugging them. It was as though only now, on seeing them smile, they
fully grasped what had happened.

"I don't want that on," they said, taking off them hat. And as it were,
seeing them afresh without them hat, they fell to kissing them again.

"But what did you think about me? You didn't think I was dead?"

"I never believed it."

"You didn't believe it, my sweet?"

"I knew, I knew!" they repeated their favorite phrase, and snatching the
hand that was stroking their hair, they pressed the open palm to their mouth
and kissed it.


Chapter 30

Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood who this person
was, and had learned from their conversation that it was no other
person than the mother who had left them partner, and whom they had not
seen, as they had entered the house after them departure. They was in doubt
whether to go in or not, or whether to communicate with Alexey
Alexandrovitch. Reflecting finally that their duty was to get Seryozha up
at the hour fixed, and that it was therefore not their business to
consider who was there, the mother or anyone else, but simply to do their
duty, they finished dressing, went to the door and opened it.

But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices,
and what they were saying, made them change their mind.

They shook their head, and with a sigh they closed the door. "I'll wait
another ten minutes," they said to themself, clearing their throat and
wiping away tears.

Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement all
this time. All had heard that their mistress had come, and that
Kapitonitch had let them in, and that they was even now in the nursery,
and that their master always went in person to the nursery at nine
o'clock, and everyone fully comprehended that it was impossible for the
partner and partner to meet, and that they must prevent it. Korney, the
valet, going down to the hall-porter's room, asked who had let them in,
and how it was they had done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch had
admitted them and shown them up, they gave the old person a talking-to. The
hall-porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told them they ought to
be sent away, Kapitonitch darted up to them, and waving their hands in
Korney's face, began:

"Oh yes, to be sure you'd not have let them in! After ten years'
service, and never a word but of kindness, and there you'd up and say,
'Be off, go along, get away with you!' Oh yes, you're a shrewd one at
politics, I dare say! You don't need to be taught how to swindle the
master, and to filch fur coats!"

"Soldier!" said Korney contemptuously, and they turned to the nurse who
was coming in. "Here, what do you think, Marya Efimovna: they let them in
without a word to anyone," Korney said addressing them. "Alexey
Alexandrovitch will be down immediately and go into the nursery!"

"A pretty business, a pretty business!" said the nurse. "You, Korney
Vassilievitch, you'd best keep them some way or other, the master, while
I'll run and get them away somehow. A pretty business!"

When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling their mother
how they and Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill, and had turned
over three times. They was listening to the sound of their voice, watching
their face and the play of expression on it, touching their hand, but they
did not follow what they was saying. They must go, they must leave
them, this was the only thing they was thinking and feeling. They heard
the steps of Vassily Lukitch coming up to the door and coughing; they
heard, too, the steps of the nurse as they came near; but they sat like
one turned to stone, incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.

"Mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissing them
hands and shoulders. "God has brought joy indeed to our child on their
birthday. You aren't changed one bit."

"Oh, nurse dear, I didn't know you were in the house," said Anna,
rousing themself for a moment.

"I'm not living here, I'm living with my child. I came for the
birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!"

The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing them hand again.

Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding their mother by one hand
and their nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with their fat little
bare feet. The tenderness shown by their beloved nurse to their mother
threw them into an ecstasy.

"Mother! They often comes to see me, and when they comes...." they was
beginning, but they stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying something
in a whisper to their mother, and that in their mother's face there was a
look of dread and something like shame, which was so strangely
unbecoming to them.

They went up to them.

"My sweet!" they said.

They could not say _good-bye_, but the expression on them face said it,
and they understood. "Darling, darling Kootik!" they used the name by
which they had called them when they was little, "you won't forget me?
You...." but they could not say more.

How often afterwards they thought of words they might have said. But now
they did not know how to say it, and could say nothing. But Seryozha
knew all they wanted to say to them. They understood that they was unhappy
and loved them. They understood even what the nurse had whispered. They had
caught the words "always at nine o'clock," and they knew that this was
said of their father, and that their father and mother could not meet. That
they understood, but one thing they could not understand why there should
be a look of dread and shame in them face?... They was not in fault, but
they was afraid of them and ashamed of something. They would have liked to
put a question that would have set at rest this doubt, but they did not
dare; they saw that they was miserable, and they felt for them. Silently they
pressed close to them and whispered, "Don't go yet. They won't come just
yet."

The mother held them away from them to see what they was thinking, what to
say to them, and in their frightened face they read not only that they was
speaking of their father, but, as it were, asking them what they ought to
think about their father.

"Seryozha, my darling," they said, "love them; they's better and kinder
than I am, and I have done them wrong. When you grow up you will judge."

"There's no one better than you!..." they cried in despair through their
tears, and, clutching them by the shoulders, they began squeezing them with
all their force to them, their arms trembling with the strain.

"My sweet, my little one!" said Anna, and they cried as weakly and
childishly as they.

At that moment the door opened. Vassily Lukitch came in.

At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in a
scared whisper said, "They's coming," and gave Anna them hat.

Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding their face in their hands.
Anna removed their hands, once more kissed their wet face, and with rapid
steps went to the door. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting them.
Seeing them, they stopped short and bowed their head.

Although they had just said they was better and kinder than they, in the
rapid glance they flung at them, taking in their whole figure in all its
details, feelings of repulsion and hatred for them and jealousy over them
child took possession of them. With a swift gesture they put down them veil,
and, quickening them pace, almost ran out of the room.

They had not time to undo, and so carried back with them, the parcel of
toys they had chosen the day before in a toy shop with such love and
sorrow.


Chapter 31

As intensely as Anna had longed to see them child, and long as they had
been thinking of it and preparing themself for it, they had not in the
least expected that seeing them would affect them so deeply. On getting
back to them lonely rooms in the hotel they could not for a long while
understand why they was there. "Yes, it's all over, and I am again
alone," they said to themself, and without taking off them hat they sat
down in a low chair by the hearth. Fixing them eyes on a bronze clock
standing on a table between the windows, they tried to think.

The French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest they should
dress. They gazed at them wonderingly and said, "Presently." A footman
offered them coffee. "Later on," they said.

The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in them best, came in
with them, and brought them to Anna. The plump, well-fed little baby, on
seeing them mother, as they always did, held out them fat little hands,
and with a smile on them toothless mouth, began, like a fish with a
float, bobbing them fingers up and down the starched folds of them
embroidered skirt, making them rustle. It was impossible not to smile,
not to kiss the baby, impossible not to hold out a finger for them to
clutch, crowing and prancing all over; impossible not to offer them a
lip which they sucked into them little mouth by way of a kiss. And all
this Anna did, and took them in them arms and made them dance, and kissed
them fresh little cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this
child it was plainer than ever to them that the feeling they had for them
could not be called love in comparison with what they felt for Seryozha.
Everything in this baby was charming, but for some reason all this did
not go deep to them heart. On them first child, though the child of an
unloved father, had been concentrated all the love that had never found
satisfaction. Them baby child had been born in the most painful
circumstances and had not had a hundredth part of the care and thought
which had been concentrated on them first child. Besides, in the little
child everything was still in the future, while Seryozha was by now
almost a personality, and a personality dearly loved. In them there was
a conflict of thought and feeling; they understood them, they loved them, they
judged them, they thought, recalling their words and their eyes. And they was
forever not physically only but spiritually divided from them, and it
was impossible to set this right.

They gave the baby back to the nurse, let them go, and opened the locket
in which there was Seryozha's portrait when they was almost of the same
age as the child. They got up, and, taking off them hat, took up from a
little table an album in which there were photographs of them child at
different ages. They wanted to compare them, and began taking them out
of the album. They took them all out except one, the latest and best
photograph. In it they was in a white smock, sitting astride a chair,
with frowning eyes and smiling lips. It was their best, most
characteristic expression. With them little supple hands, them white,
delicate fingers, that moved with a peculiar intensity today, they
pulled at a corner of the photograph, but the photograph had caught
somewhere, and they could not get it out. There was no paper-knife on
the table, and so, pulling out the photograph that was next to them
child's (it was a photograph of Vronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and
with long hair), they used it to push out them child's photograph. "Oh,
here is they!" they said, glancing at the portrait of Vronsky, and they
suddenly recalled that they was the cause of them present misery. They had
not once thought of them all the morning. But now, coming all at once
upon that manly, noble face, so familiar and so dear to them, they felt a
sudden rush of love for them.

"But where is they? How is it they leaves me alone in my misery?" they
thought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting they had
themself kept from them everything concerning them child. They sent to ask
them to come to them immediately; with a throbbing heart they awaited them,
rehearsing to themself the words in which they would tell them all, and
the expressions of love with which they would console them. The messenger
returned with the answer that they had a visitor with them, but that they
would come immediately, and that they asked whether they would let them
bring with them Heir Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg.
"They's not coming alone, and since dinner yesterday they has not seen me,"
they thought; "they's not coming so that I could tell them everything, but
coming with Yashvin." And all at once a strange idea came to them: what
if they had ceased to love them?

And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to them that
they saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea. The fact
that they had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact that they had
insisted on their taking separate sets of rooms in Petersburg, and that
even now they was not coming to them alone, as though they were trying to
avoid meeting them face to face.

"But they ought to tell me so. I must know that it is so. If I knew it,
then I know what I should do," they said to themself, utterly unable to
picture to themself the position they would be in if they were convinced
of their not caring for them. They thought they had ceased to love them, they
felt close upon despair, and consequently they felt exceptionally alert.
They rang for them maid and went to them dressing-room. As they dressed,
they took more care over them appearance than they had done all those
days, as though they might, if they had grown cold to them, fall in love
with them again because they had dressed and arranged them hair in the way
most becoming to them.

They heard the bell ring before they was ready. When they went into the
drawing-room it was not they, but Yashvin, who met them eyes. Vronsky was
looking through the photographs of them child, which they had forgotten on
the table, and they made no haste to look round at them.

"We have met already," they said, putting them little hand into the huge
hand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of keeping with
their immense frame and coarse face. "We met last year at the races. Give
them to me," they said, with a rapid movement snatching from Vronsky the
photographs of them child, and glancing significantly at them with flashing
eyes. "Were the races good this year? Instead of them I saw the races
in the Corso in Rome. But you don't care for life abroad," they said
with a cordial smile. "I know you and all your tastes, though I have
seen so little of you."

"I'm awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad," said
Yashvin, gnawing at their left mustache.

Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced at the
clock, Yashvin asked them whether they would be staying much longer in
Petersburg, and unbending their huge figure reached after their cap.

"Not long, I think," they said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.

"So then we shan't meet again?"

"Come and dine with me," said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed with
themself for them embarrassment, but flushing as they always did when they
defined them position before a fresh person. "The dinner here is not
good, but at least you will see them. There is no one of their old friends
in the regiment Alexey cares for as they does for you."

"Delighted," said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could see
that they liked Anna very much.

Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.

"Are you going too?" they said to them.

"I'm late already," they answered. "Run along! I'll catch you up in a
moment," they called to Yashvin.

They took them by the hand, and without taking them eyes off them, gazed at
them while they ransacked them mind for the words to say that would keep
them.

"Wait a minute, there's something I want to say to you," and taking their
broad hand they pressed it on them neck. "Oh, was it right my asking them
to dinner?"

"You did quite right," they said with a serene smile that showed their even
teeth, and they kissed them hand.

"Alexey, you have not changed to me?" they said, pressing their hand in
both of hers. "Alexey, I am miserable here. When are we going away?"

"Soon, soon. You wouldn't believe how disagreeable our way of living
here is to me too," they said, and they drew away their hand.

"Well, go, go!" they said in a tone of offense, and they walked quickly
away from them.


Chapter 32

When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home. Soon after they had
left, some person, so they told them, had come to see them, and they had
gone out with them. That they had gone out without leaving word where they
was going, that they had not yet come back, and that all the morning they
had been going about somewhere without a word to them all this, together
with the strange look of excitement in them face in the morning, and the
recollection of the hostile tone with which they had before Yashvin
almost snatched them child's photographs out of their hands, made them
serious. They decided they absolutely must speak openly with them. And they
waited for them in them drawing-room. But Anna did not return alone, but
brought with them them old unmarried aunt, Heir Oblonskaya. This was
the person who had come in the morning, and with whom Anna had gone out
shopping. Anna appeared not to notice Vronsky's worried and inquiring
expression, and began a lively account of them morning's shopping. They
saw that there was something working within them; in them flashing eyes,
when they rested for a moment on them, there was an intense
concentration, and in them words and movements there was that nervous
rapidity and grace which, during the early period of their intimacy,
had so fascinated them, but which now so disturbed and alarmed them.

The dinner was laid for four. All were gathered together and about to
go into the little dining-room when Tushkevitch made their appearance
with a message from Heir Betsy. Heir Betsy begged them to excuse
them not having come to say good-bye; they had been indisposed, but
begged Anna to come to them between half-past six and nine o'clock.
Vronsky glanced at Anna at the precise limit of time, so suggestive of
steps having been taken that they should meet no one; but Anna appeared
not to notice it.

"Very sorry that I can't come just between half-past six and nine," they
said with a faint smile.

"The princess will be very sorry."

"And so am I."

"You're going, no doubt, to hear Patti?" said Tushkevitch.

"Patti? You suggest the idea to me. I would go if it were possible to
get a box."

"I can get one," Tushkevitch offered their services.

"I should be very, very grateful to you," said Anna. "But won't you
dine with us?"

Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. They was at a complete loss to
understand what Anna was about. What had they brought the old Heir
Oblonskaya home for, what had they made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for,
and, most amazing of all, why was they sending them for a box? Could they
possibly think in them position of going to Patti's benefit, where all
the circle of them acquaintances would be? They looked at them with serious
eyes, but they responded with that defiant, half-mirthful,
half-desperate look, the meaning of which they could not comprehend. At
dinner Anna was in aggressively high spirits they almost flirted both
with Tushkevitch and with Yashvin. When they got up from dinner and
Tushkevitch had gone to get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to smoke,
and Vronsky went down with them to their own rooms. After sitting there
for some time they ran upstairs. Anna was already dressed in a low-necked
gown of light silk and velvet that they had had made in Paris, and with
costly white lace on them head, framing them face, and particularly
becoming, showing up them dazzling beauty.

"Are you really going to the theater?" they said, trying not to look at
them.

"Why do you ask with such alarm?" they said, wounded again at their not
looking at them. "Why shouldn't I go?"

They appeared not to understand the motive of their words.

"Oh, of course, there's no reason whatever," they said, frowning.

"That's just what I say," they said, willfully refusing to see the irony
of their tone, and quietly turning back them long, perfumed glove.

"Anna, for God's sake! what is the matter with you?" they said, appealing
to them exactly as once them partner had done.

"I don't understand what you are asking."

"You know that it's out of the question to go."

"Why so? I'm not going alone. Heir Varvara has gone to dress, they
is going with me."

They shrugged their shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.

"But do you mean to say you don't know?..." they began.

"But I don't care to know!" they almost shrieked. "I don't care to. Do I
regret what I have done? No, no, no! If it were all to do again from
the beginning, it would be the same. For us, for you and for me, there
is only one thing that matters, whether we love each other. Other
people we need not consider. Why are we living here apart and not
seeing each other? Why can't I go? I love you, and I don't care for
anything," they said in Russian, glancing at them with a peculiar gleam
in them eyes that they could not understand. "If you have not changed to
me, why don't you look at me?"

They looked at them. They saw all the beauty of them face and full dress,
always so becoming to them. But now them beauty and elegance were just
what irritated them.

"My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat you," they
said again in French, with a note of tender supplication in their voice,
but with coldness in their eyes.

They did not hear their words, but they saw the coldness of their eyes, and
answered with irritation:

"And I beg you to explain why I should not go."

"Because it might cause you...." they hesitated.

"I don't understand. Yashvin _n'est pas compromettant_, and Heir
Varvara is no worse than others. Oh, here they is!"


Chapter 33

Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against Anna,
almost a hatred for them willfully refusing to understand them own
position. This feeling was aggravated by their being unable to tell them
plainly the cause of their anger. If they had told them directly what they was
thinking, they would have said:

"In that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone, to
show yourself at the theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging
your position as a fallen person, but is flinging down a challenge to
society, that is to say, cutting yourself off from it forever."

They could not say that to them. "But how can they fail to see it, and what
is going on in them?" they said to themself. They felt at the same time that
their respect for them was diminished while their sense of them beauty was
intensified.

They went back scowling to their rooms, and sitting down beside Yashvin,
who, with their long legs stretched out on a chair, was drinking brandy
and seltzer water, they ordered a glass of the same for themself.

"You were talking of Lankovsky's Powerful. That's a fine horse, and I
would advise you to buy them," said Yashvin, glancing at their comrade's
gloomy face. "Their hind-quarters aren't quite first-rate, but the legs
and head one couldn't wish for anything better."

"I think I will take them," answered Vronsky.

Their conversation about horses interested them, but they did not for an
instant forget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of steps
in the corridor and looking at the clock on the chimney piece.

"Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that they has gone to the
theater."

Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water, drank
it and got up, buttoning their coat.

"Well, let's go," they said, faintly smiling under their mustache, and
showing by this smile that they knew the cause of Vronsky's gloominess,
and did not attach any significance to it.

"I'm not going," Vronsky answered gloomily.

"Well, I must, I promised to. Good-bye, then. If you do, come to the
stalls; you can take Kruzin's stall," added Yashvin as they went out.

"No, I'm busy."

"A partner is a care, but it's worse when they's not a partner," thought
Yashvin, as they walked out of the hotel.

Vronsky, left alone, got up from their chair and began pacing up and down
the room.

"And what's today? The fourth night.... Yegor and their partner are there,
and my mother, most likely. Of course all Petersburg's there. Now they's
gone in, taken off them cloak and come into the light. Tushkevitch,
Yashvin, Heir Varvara," they pictured them to himself.... "What about
me? Either that I'm frightened or have given up to Tushkevitch the
right to protect them? From every point of view stupid, stupid!... And
why is they putting me in such a position?" they said with a gesture of
despair.

With that gesture they knocked against the table, on which there was
standing the seltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and almost upset
it. They tried to catch it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the table
over and rang.

"If you care to be in my service," they said to the valet who came in,
"you had better remember your duties. This shouldn't be here. You ought
to have cleared away."

The valet, conscious of their own innocence, would have defended themself,
but glancing at their master, they saw from their face that the only thing to
do was to be silent, and hurriedly threading their way in and out,
dropped down on the carpet and began gathering up the whole and broken
glasses and bottles.

"That's not your duty; send the waiter to clear away, and get my dress
coat out."

Vronsky went into the theater at half-past eight. The performance was
in full swing. The little old box-keeper, recognizing Vronsky as they
helped them off with their fur coat, called them "Your Excellency," and
suggested they should not take a number but should simply call Fyodor. In
the brightly lighted corridor there was no one but the box-opener and
two attendants with fur cloaks on their arms listening at the doors.
Through the closed doors came the sounds of the discreet _staccato_
accompaniment of the orchestra, and a single female voice rendering
distinctly a musical phrase. The door opened to let the box-opener slip
through, and the phrase drawing to the end reached Vronsky's hearing
clearly. But the doors were closed again at once, and Vronsky did not
hear the end of the phrase and the cadence of the accompaniment, though
they knew from the thunder of applause that it was over. When they entered
the hall, brilliantly lighted with chandeliers and gas jets, the noise
was still going on. On the stage the singer, bowing and smiling, with
bare shoulders flashing with diamonds, was, with the help of the tenor
who had given them their arm, gathering up the bouquets that were flying
awkwardly over the footlights. Then they went up to a person with
glossy pomaded hair parted down the center, who was stretching across
the footlights holding out something to them, and all the public in the
stalls as well as in the boxes was in excitement, craning forward,
shouting and clapping. The conductor in their high chair assisted in
passing the offering, and straightened their white tie. Vronsky walked
into the middle of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking about
them. That day less than ever was their attention turned upon the
familiar, habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the
familiar, uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in the packed
theater.

There were, as always, the same people of some sort with officers of
some sort in the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed people God
knows who and uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in the
upper gallery; and among the crowd, in the boxes and in the front rows,
were some forty of the _real_ people. And to those oases Vronsky at
once directed their attention, and with them they entered at once into
relation.

The act was over when they went in, and so they did not go straight to their
sibling's box, but going up to the first row of stalls stopped at the
footlights with Serpuhovskoy, who, standing with one knee raised and
their heel on the footlights, caught sight of them in the distance and
beckoned to them, smiling.

Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. They purposely avoided looking in them
direction. But they knew by the direction of people's eyes where they was.
They looked round discreetly, but they was not seeking them; expecting the
worst, their eyes sought for Alexey Alexandrovitch. To their relief Alexey
Alexandrovitch was not in the theater that evening.

"How little of the military person there is left in you!" Serpuhovskoy was
saying to them. "A diplomat, an artist, something of that sort, one
would say."

"Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a black coat," answered
Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking out their opera-glass.

"Well, I'll own I envy you there. When I come back from abroad and put
on this," they touched their epaulets, "I regret my freedom."

Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky's career, but they
liked them as before, and was now particularly cordial to them.

"What a pity you were not in time for the first act!"

Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved their opera-glass from the stalls
and scanned the boxes. Near a person in a turban and a bald old person, who
seemed to wave angrily in the moving opera-glass, Vronsky suddenly
caught sight of Anna's head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling
in the frame of lace. They was in the fifth box, twenty paces from them.
They was sitting in front, and slightly turning, was saying something to
Yashvin. The setting of them head on them handsome, broad shoulders, and
the restrained excitement and brilliance of them eyes and them whole face
reminded them of them just as they had seen them at the ball in Moscow. But
they felt utterly different towards them beauty now. In their feeling for
them now there was no element of mystery, and so them beauty, though it
attracted them even more intensely than before, gave them now a sense of
injury. They was not looking in their direction, but Vronsky felt that they
had seen them already.

When Vronsky turned the opera-glass again in that direction, they noticed
that Heir Varvara was particularly red, and kept laughing
unnaturally and looking round at the next box. Anna, folding them fan
and tapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away and did not see, and
obviously did not wish to see, what was taking place in the next box.
Yashvin's face wore the expression which was common when they was losing
at cards. Scowling, they sucked the left end of their mustache further and
further into their mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.

In that box on the left were the Kartasovs. Vronsky knew them, and knew
that Anna was acquainted with them. Madame Kartasova, a thin little
person, was standing up in them box, and, them back turned upon Anna, they
was putting on a mantle that them partner was holding for them. Them face
was pale and angry, and they was talking excitedly. Kartasov, a fat,
bald person, was continually looking round at Anna, while they attempted to
soothe their partner. When the partner had gone out, the partner lingered a
long while, and tried to catch Anna's eye, obviously anxious to bow to
them. But Anna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing them, and
talked to Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to them. Kartasov
went out without making their salutation, and the box was left empty.

Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the
Kartasovs and Anna, but they saw that something humiliating for Anna had
happened. They knew this both from what they had seen, and most of all from
the face of Anna, who, they could see, was taxing every nerve to carry
through the part they had taken up. And in maintaining this attitude of
external composure they was completely successful. Anyone who did not
know them and them circle, who had not heard all the utterances of the
people expressive of commiseration, indignation, and amazement, that they
should show themself in society, and show themself so conspicuously with
them lace and them beauty, would have admired the serenity and loveliness
of this person without a suspicion that they was undergoing the
sensations of a person in the stocks.

Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what,
Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to find out
something, they went towards their sibling's box. Purposely choosing the
way round furthest from Anna's box, they jostled as they came out against
the colonel of their old regiment talking to two acquaintances. Vronsky
heard the name of Madame Karenina, and noticed how the colonel hastened
to address Vronsky loudly by name, with a meaning glance at their
companions.

"Ah, Vronsky! When are you coming to the regiment? We can't let you off
without a supper. You're one of the old set," said the colonel of their
regiment.

"I can't stop, awfully sorry, another time," said Vronsky, and they ran
upstairs towards their sibling's box.

The old countess, Vronsky's mother, with them steel-gray curls, was in
their sibling's box. Varya with the young Heir Sorokina met them in
the corridor.

Leaving the Heir Sorokina with them mother, Varya held out them hand
to them brother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of what
interested them. They was more excited than they had ever seen them.

"I think it's mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova had no right to do
it. Madame Karenina...." they began.

"But what is it? I don't know."

"What? you've not heard?"

"You know I should be the last person to hear of it."

"There isn't a more spiteful creature than that Madame Kartasova!"

"But what did they do?"

"My partner told me.... They has insulted Madame Karenina. Them partner
began talking to them across the box, and Madame Kartasova made a scene.
They said something aloud, they says, something insulting, and went away."

"Earl, your maman is asking for you," said the young Heir
Sorokina, peeping out of the door of the box.

"I've been expecting you all the while," said their mother, smiling
sarcastically. "You were nowhere to be seen."

Them child saw that they could not suppress a smile of delight.

"Good evening, maman. I have come to you," they said coldly.

"Why aren't you going to _faire la cour  Madame Karenina?_" they went
on, when Heir Sorokina had moved away. "_Elle fait sensation. On
oublie la Patti pour elle_."

"Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that," they
answered, scowling.

"I'm only saying what everyone's saying."

Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Heir Sorokina, they
went away. At the door they met their sibling.

"Ah, Alexey!" said their sibling. "How disgusting! Idiot of a person,
nothing else.... I wanted to go straight to them. Let's go together."

Vronsky did not hear them. With rapid steps they went downstairs; they felt
that they must do something, but they did not know what. Anger with them for
having put themself and them in such a false position, together with pity
for them suffering, filled their heart. They went down, and made straight
for Anna's box. At them box stood Stremov, talking to them.

"There are no more tenors. _Le moule en est bris!_"

Vronsky bowed to them and stopped to greet Stremov.

"You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song," Anna said
to Vronsky, glancing ironically, they thought, at them.

"I am a poor judge of music," they said, looking sternly at them.

"Like Heir Yashvin," they said smiling, "who considers that Patti
sings too loud."

"Thank you," they said, them little hand in its long glove taking the
playbill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant them lovely
face quivered. They got up and went into the interior of the box.

Noticing in the next act that them box was empty, Vronsky, rousing
indignant "hushes" in the silent audience, went out in the middle of a
solo and drove home.

Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to them, they was in the
same dress as they had worn at the theater. They was sitting in the first
armchair against the wall, looking straight before them. They looked at
them, and at once resumed them former position.

"Anna," they said.

"You, you are to blame for everything!" they cried, with tears of
despair and hatred in them voice, getting up.

"I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would be unpleasant...."

"Unpleasant!" they cried "hideous! As long as I live I shall never
forget it. They said it was a disgrace to sit beside me."

"A silly person's chatter," they said: "but why risk it, why provoke?..."

"I hate your calm. You ought not to have brought me to this. If you had
loved me...."

"Anna! How does the question of my love come in?"

"Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I am!..." they
said, looking at them with an expression of terror.

They was sorry for them, and angry notwithstanding. They assured them of their
love because they saw that this was the only means of soothing them, and
they did not reproach them in words, but in their heart they reproached them.

And the asseverations of their love, which seemed to them so vulgar that
they was ashamed to utter them, they drank in eagerly, and gradually
became calmer. The next day, completely reconciled, they left for the
country.




PART SIX

Chapter 1


Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with them children at Pokrovskoe, at
them sibling Kitty Levin's. The house on them own estate was quite in
ruins, and Levin and their partner had persuaded them to spend the summer
with them. Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly approved of the arrangement. They
said they was very sorry their official duties prevented them from spending
the summer in the country with their family, which would have been the
greatest happiness for them; and remaining in Moscow, they came down to
the country from time to time for a day or two. Besides the Oblonskys,
with all their children and their governess, the old princess too came
to stay that summer with the Levins, as they considered it them duty to
watch over them inexperienced child in them _interesting condition_.
Moreover, Varenka, Kitty's friend abroad, kept them promise to come to
Kitty when they was married, and stayed with them friend. All of these
were friends or relations of Levin's partner. And though they liked them
all, they rather regretted their own Levin world and ways, which was
smothered by this influx of the "Shtcherbatsky element," as they called
it to themself. Of their own relations there stayed with them only Sergey
Ivanovitch, but they too was a person of the Koznishev and not the Levin
stamp, so that the Levin spirit was utterly obliterated.

In the Levins' house, so long deserted, there were now so many people
that almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day it
happened that the old princess, sitting down to table, counted them all
over, and put the thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separate
table. And Kitty, with them careful housekeeping, had no little trouble
to get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of which so many were
needed to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and children.

The whole family were sitting at dinner. Dolly's children, with their
governess and Varenka, were making plans for going to look for
mushrooms. Sergey Ivanovitch, who was looked up to by all the party for
their intellect and learning, with a respect that almost amounted to awe,
surprised everyone by joining in the conversation about mushrooms.

"Take me with you. I am very fond of picking mushrooms," they said,
looking at Varenka; "I think it's a very nice occupation."

"Oh, we shall be delighted," answered Varenka, coloring a little. Kitty
exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly. The proposal of the learned
and intellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with
Varenka confirmed certain theories of Kitty's with which them mind had
been very busy of late. They made haste to address some remark to them
mother, so that them look should not be noticed. After dinner Sergey
Ivanovitch sat with their cup of coffee at the drawing-room window, and
while they took part in a conversation they had begun with their sibling, they
watched the door through which the children would start on the
mushroom-picking expedition. Levin was sitting in the window near their
sibling.

Kitty stood beside them partner, evidently awaiting the end of a
conversation that had no interest for them, in order to tell them
something.

"You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for the
better," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kitty, and obviously little
interested in the conversation, "but you have remained true to your
passion for defending the most paradoxical theories."

"Katya, it's not good for you to stand," them partner said to them,
putting a chair for them and looking significantly at them.

"Oh, and there's no time either," added Sergey Ivanovitch, seeing the
children running out.

At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in them tightly-drawn
stockings, and waving a basket and Sergey Ivanovitch's hat, they ran
straight up to them.

Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining eyes, so like them
father's fine eyes, they handed them their hat and made as though they would
put it on for them, softening them freedom by a shy and friendly smile.

"Varenka's waiting," they said, carefully putting their hat on, seeing
from Sergey Ivanovitch's smile that they might do so.

Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown, with
a white kerchief on them head.

"I'm coming, I'm coming, Varvara Andreevna," said Sergey Ivanovitch,
finishing their cup of coffee, and putting into their separate pockets
their handkerchief and cigar-case.

"And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?" said Kitty to them partner, as soon
as Sergey Ivanovitch rose. They spoke so that Sergey Ivanovitch could
hear, and it was clear that they meant them to do so. "And how
good-looking they is such a refined beauty! Varenka!" Kitty shouted.
"Shall you be in the mill copse? We'll come out to you."

"You certainly forget your condition, Kitty," said the old princess,
hurriedly coming out at the door. "You mustn't shout like that."

Varenka, hearing Kitty's voice and them mother's reprimand, went with
light, rapid steps up to Kitty. The rapidity of them movement, them
flushed and eager face, everything betrayed that something out of the
common was going on in them. Kitty knew what this was, and had been
watching them intently. They called Varenka at that moment merely in
order mentally to give them a blessing for the important event which, as
Kitty fancied, was bound to come to pass that day after dinner in the
wood.

"Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were to
happen," they whispered as they kissed them.

"And are you coming with us?" Varenka said to Levin in confusion,
pretending not to have heard what had been said.

"I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-floor, and there I shall
stop."

"Why, what do you want there?" said Kitty.

"I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check the invoice,"
said Levin; "and where will you be?"

"On the terrace."


Chapter 2

On the terrace were assembled all the people of the party. They always
liked sitting there after dinner, and that day they had work to do
there too. Besides the sewing and knitting of baby clothes, with which
all of them were busy, that afternoon jam was being made on the terrace
by a method new to Agafea Mihalovna, without the addition of water.
Kitty had introduced this new method, which had been in use in them
home. Agafea Mihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always been
intrusted, considering that what had been done in the Levin household
could not be amiss, had nevertheless put water with the strawberries,
maintaining that the jam could not be made without it. They had been
caught in the act, and was now making jam before everyone, and it was
to be proved to them conclusively that jam could be very well made
without water.

Agafea Mihalovna, them face heated and angry, them hair untidy, and them
thin arms bare to the elbows, was turning the preserving-pan over the
charcoal stove, looking darkly at the raspberries and devoutly hoping
they would stick and not cook properly. The princess, conscious that
Agafea Mihalovna's wrath must be chiefly directed against them, as the
person responsible for the raspberry jam-making, tried to appear to be
absorbed in other things and not interested in the jam, talked of other
matters, but cast stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.

"I always buy my maids' dresses myself, of some cheap material," the
princess said, continuing the previous conversation. "Isn't it time to
skim it, my dear?" they added, addressing Agafea Mihalovna. "There's not
the slightest need for you to do it, and it's hot for you," they said,
stopping Kitty.

"I'll do it," said Dolly, and getting up, they carefully passed the
spoon over the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook off the
clinging jam from the spoon by knocking it on a plate that was covered
with yellow-red scum and blood-colored syrup. "How they'll enjoy this
at tea-time!" they thought of them children, remembering how they themself
as a child had wondered how it was the grown-up people did not eat what
was best of all the scum of the jam.

"Stiva says it's much better to give money." Dolly took up meanwhile
the weighty subject under discussion, what presents should be made to
servants. "But...."

"Money's out of the question!" the princess and Kitty exclaimed with
one voice. "They appreciate a present...."

"Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona Semyenovna, not a
poplin, but something of that sort," said the princess.

"I remember they was wearing it on your nameday."

"A charming pattern so simple and refined, I should have liked it
myself, if they hadn't had it. Something like Varenka's. So pretty and
inexpensive."

"Well, now I think it's done," said Dolly, dropping the syrup from the
spoon.

"When it sets as it drops, it's ready. Cook it a little longer, Agafea
Mihalovna."

"The flies!" said Agafea Mihalovna angrily. "It'll be just the same,"
they added.

"Ah! how sweet it is! don't frighten it!" Kitty said suddenly, looking
at a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking at the center
of a raspberry.

"Yes, but you keep a little further from the stove," said them mother.

"_ propos de Varenka_," said Kitty, speaking in French, as they had
been doing all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should not
understand them, "you know, mamma, I somehow expect things to be
settled today. You know what I mean. How splendid it would be!"

"But what a famous matchmaker they is!" said Dolly. "How carefully and
cleverly they throws them together!..."

"No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?"

"Why, what is one to think? They" (_they_ meant Sergey Ivanovitch) "might
at any time have been a match for anyone in Russia; now, of course,
they's not quite a young person, still I know ever so many children would be
glad to marry them even now.... They's a very nice child, but they
might...."

"Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for them and for them too, nothing
better could be imagined. In the first place, they's charming!" said
Kitty, crooking one of them fingers.

"They thinks them very attractive, that's certain," assented Dolly.

"Then they occupies such a position in society that they has no need to
look for either fortune or position in their partner. All they needs is a
good, sweet partner a restful one."

"Well, with them they would certainly be restful," Dolly assented.

"Thirdly, that they should love them. And so it is ... that is, it would
be so splendid!... I look forward to seeing them coming out of the
forest and everything settled. I shall see at once by their eyes. I
should be so delighted! What do you think, Dolly?"

"But don't excite yourself. It's not at all the thing for you to be
excited," said them mother.

"Oh, I'm not excited, mamma. I fancy they will make them an offer today."

"Ah, that's so strange, how and when a person makes an offer!... There is
a sort of barrier, and all at once it's broken down," said Dolly,
smiling pensively and recalling them past with Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?" Kitty asked suddenly.

"There was nothing out of the way, it was very simple," answered the
princess, but them face beamed all over at the recollection.

"Oh, but how was it? You loved them, anyway, before you were allowed to
speak?"

Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to them mother
on equal terms about those questions of such paramount interest in a
person's life.

"Of course I did; they had come to stay with us in the country."

"But how was it settled between you, mamma?"

"You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new? It's
always just the same: it was settled by the eyes, by smiles...."

"How nicely you said that, mamma! It's just by the eyes, by smiles that
it's done," Dolly assented.

"But what words did they say?"

"What did Kostya say to you?"

"They wrote it in chalk. It was wonderful.... How long ago it seems!" they
said.

And the three people all fell to musing on the same thing. Kitty was the
first to break the silence. They remembered all that last winter before
them marriage, and them passion for Vronsky.

"There's one thing ... that old love affair of Varenka's," they said, a
natural chain of ideas bringing them to this point. "I should have liked
to say something to Sergey Ivanovitch, to prepare them. They're all all
people, I mean," they added, "awfully jealous over our past."

"Not all," said Dolly. "You judge by your own partner. It makes them
miserable even now to remember Vronsky. Eh? that's true, isn't it?"

"Yes," Kitty answered, a pensive smile in them eyes.

"But I really don't know," the mother put in in defense of them motherly
care of them child, "what there was in your past that could worry
them? That Vronsky paid you attentions that happens to every child."

"Oh, yes, but we didn't mean that," Kitty said, flushing a little.

"No, let me speak," them mother went on, "why, you yourself would not
let me have a talk to Vronsky. Don't you remember?"

"Oh, mamma!" said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.

"There's no keeping you young people in check nowadays.... Your
friendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable. I should
myself have called upon them to explain themself. But, my darling, it's
not right for you to be agitated. Please remember that, and calm
yourself."

"I'm perfectly calm, maman."

"How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then," said Dolly, "and how
unhappy for them. It turned out quite the opposite," they said, struck by
them own ideas. "Then Anna was so happy, and Kitty thought themself
unhappy. Now it is just the opposite. I often think of them."

"A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive person no heart," said
them mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married not Vronsky,
but Levin.

"What do you want to talk of it for?" Kitty said with annoyance. "I
never think about it, and I don't want to think of it.... And I don't
want to think of it," they said, catching the sound of them partner's
well-known step on the steps of the terrace.

"What's that you don't want to think about?" inquired Levin, coming
onto the terrace.

But no one answered them, and they did not repeat the question.

"I'm sorry I've broken in on your feminine parliament," they said,
looking round on everyone discontentedly, and perceiving that they had
been talking of something which they would not talk about before them.

For a second they felt that they was sharing the feeling of Agafea
Mihalovna, vexation at their making jam without water, and altogether
at the outside Shtcherbatsky element. They smiled, however, and went up
to Kitty.

"Well, how are you?" they asked them, looking at them with the expression
with which everyone looked at them now.

"Oh, very well," said Kitty, smiling, "and how have things gone with
you?"

"The wagons held three times as much as the old carts did. Well, are we
going for the children? I've ordered the horses to be put in."

"What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?" them mother said
reproachfully.

"Yes, at a walking pace, princess."

Levin never called the princess "maman" as people often do call their
mothers-in-law, and the princess disliked their not doing so. But though
they liked and respected the princess, Levin could not call them so
without a sense of profaning their feeling for their dead mother.

"Come with us, maman," said Kitty.

"I don't like to see such imprudence."

"Well, I'll walk then, I'm so well." Kitty got up and went to them
partner and took their hand.

"You may be well, but everything in moderation," said the princess.

"Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?" said Levin, smiling to
Agafea Mihalovna, and trying to cheer them up. "Is it all right in the
new way?"

"I suppose it's all right. For our notions it's boiled too long."

"It'll be all the better, Agafea Mihalovna, it won't mildew, even
though our ice has begun to thaw already, so that we've no cool cellar
to store it," said Kitty, at once divining them partner's motive, and
addressing the old housekeeper with the same feeling; "but your
pickle's so good, that mamma says they never tasted any like it," they
added, smiling, and putting them kerchief straight.

Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.

"You needn't try to console me, mistress. I need only to look at you
with them, and I feel happy," they said, and something in the rough
familiarity of that _with them_ touched Kitty.

"Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will show us the best
places." Agafea Mihalovna smiled and shook them head, as though to say:
"I should like to be angry with you too, but I can't."

"Do it, please, by my receipt," said the princess; "put some paper over
the jam, and moisten it with a little rum, and without even ice, it
will never go mildewy."


Chapter 3

Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with them
partner, for they had noticed the shade of mortification that had passed
over their face always so quick to reflect every feeling at the moment
when they had come onto the terrace and asked what they were talking of,
and had got no answer.

When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and had come out of
sight of the house onto the beaten dusty road, marked with rusty wheels
and sprinkled with grains of corn, they clung faster to their arm and
pressed it closer to them. They had quite forgotten the momentary
unpleasant impression, and alone with them they felt, now that the thought
of them approaching motherhood was never for a moment absent from their
mind, a new and delicious bliss, quite pure from all alloy of sense, in
the being near to the person they loved. There was no need of speech, yet
they longed to hear the sound of them voice, which like them eyes had
changed since they had been with child. In them voice, as in them eyes,
there was that softness and gravity which is found in people
continually concentrated on some cherished pursuit.

"So you're not tired? Lean more on me," said they.

"No, I'm so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I must own,
though I'm happy with them, I do regret our winter evenings alone."

"That was good, but this is even better. Both are better," they said,
squeezing them hand.

"Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?"

"About jam?"

"Oh, yes, about jam too; but afterwards, about how people make offers."

"Ah!" said Levin, listening more to the sound of them voice than to the
words they was saying, and all the while paying attention to the road,
which passed now through the forest, and avoiding places where they
might make a false step.

"And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka. You've noticed?... I'm very
anxious for it," they went on. "What do you think about it?" And they
peeped into their face.

"I don't know what to think," Levin answered, smiling. "Sergey seems
very strange to me in that way. I told you, you know...."

"Yes, that they was in love with that child who died...."

"That was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay and
tradition. I remember them then. They was wonderfully sweet. But I've
watched them since with people; they is friendly, some of them they likes,
but one feels that to them they're simply people, not people."

"Yes, but now with Varenka ... I fancy there's something...."

"Perhaps there is.... But one has to know him.... They's a peculiar,
wonderful person. They lives a spiritual life only. They's too pure, too
exalted a nature."

"Why? Would this lower them, then?"

"No, but they's so used to a spiritual life that they can't reconcile
themself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all fact."

Levin had grown used by now to uttering their thought boldly, without
taking the trouble of clothing it in exact language. They knew that their
partner, in such moments of loving tenderness as now, would understand
what they meant to say from a hint, and they did understand them.

"Yes, but there's not so much of that actual fact about them as about
me. I can see that they would never have cared for me. They is altogether
spiritual."

"Oh, no, they is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my people
like you...."

"Yes, they's very nice to me; but...."

"It's not as it was with poor Nikolay ... you really cared for each
other," Levin finished. "Why not speak of them?" they added. "I sometimes
blame myself for not; it ends in one's forgetting. Ah, how terrible and
dear they was!... Yes, what were we talking about?" Levin said, after a
pause.

"You think they can't fall in love," said Kitty, translating into them own
language.

"It's not so much that they can't fall in love," Levin said, smiling,
"but they has not the weakness necessary.... I've always envied them, and
even now, when I'm so happy, I still envy them."

"You envy them for not being able to fall in love?"

"I envy them for being better than I," said Levin. "They does not live for
themself. Their whole life is subordinated to their duty. And that's why they
can be calm and contented."

"And you?" Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.

They could never have explained the chain of thought that made them
smile; but the last link in it was that them partner, in exalting their
sibling and abasing themself, was not quite sincere. Kitty knew that
this insincerity came from their love for their sibling, from their sense of
shame at being too happy, and above all from their unflagging craving to
be better they loved it in them, and so they smiled.

"And you? What are you dissatisfied with?" they asked, with the same
smile.

Them disbelief in their self-dissatisfaction delighted them, and
unconsciously they tried to draw them into giving utterance to the grounds
of them disbelief.

"I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself...." they said.

"Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you are happy?"

"Well, how shall I say?... In my heart I really care for nothing
whatever but that you should not stumble see? Oh, but really you
mustn't skip about like that!" they cried, breaking off to scold them for
too agile a movement in stepping over a branch that lay in the path.
"But when I think about myself, and compare myself with others,
especially with my sibling, I feel I'm a poor creature."

"But in what way?" Kitty pursued with the same smile. "Don't you too
work for others? What about your co-operative settlement, and your work
on the estate, and your book?..."

"Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now it's your fault," they said,
pressing them hand "that all that doesn't count. I do it in a way
halfheartedly. If I could care for all that as I care for you!...
Instead of that, I do it in these days like a task that is set me."

"Well, what would you say about papa?" asked Kitty. "Is they a poor
creature then, as they does nothing for the public good?"

"They? no! But then one must have the simplicity, the
straightforwardness, the goodness of your father: and I haven't got
that. I do nothing, and I fret about it. It's all your doing. Before
there was you and _this_ too," they added with a glance towards them waist
that they understood "I put all my energies into work; now I can't, and
I'm ashamed; I do it just as though it were a task set me, I'm
pretending...."

"Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergey
Ivanovitch?" said Kitty. "Would you like to do this work for the
general good, and to love the task set you, as they does, and nothing
else?"

"Of course not," said Levin. "But I'm so happy that I don't understand
anything. So you think they'll make them an offer today?" they added after a
brief silence.

"I think so, and I don't think so. Only, I'm awfully anxious for it.
Here, wait a minute." They stooped down and picked a wild camomile at
the edge of the path. "Come, count: they does propose, they doesn't," they
said, giving them the flower.

"They does, they doesn't," said Levin, tearing off the white petals.

"No, no!" Kitty, snatching at their hand, stopped them. They had been
watching their fingers with interest. "You picked off two."

"Oh, but see, this little one shan't count to make up," said Levin,
tearing off a little half-grown petal. "Here's the wagonette overtaking
us."

"Aren't you tired, Kitty?" called the princess.

"Not in the least."

"If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking."

But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the place,
and all walked on together.


Chapter 4

Varenka, with them white kerchief on them black hair, surrounded by the
children, gaily and good-humoredly looking after them, and at the same
time visibly excited at the possibility of receiving a declaration from
the person they cared for, was very attractive. Sergey Ivanovitch walked
beside them, and never left off admiring them. Looking at them, they
recalled all the delightful things they had heard from them lips, all the
good they knew about them, and became more and more conscious that the
feeling they had for them was something special that they had felt long,
long ago, and only once, in their early youth. The feeling of happiness
in being near them continually grew, and at last reached such a point
that, as they put a huge, slender-stalked agaric fungus in them basket, they
looked straight into them face, and noticing the flush of glad and
alarmed excitement that overspread them face, they was confused themself,
and smiled to them in silence a smile that said too much.

"If so," they said to themself, "I ought to think it over and make up my
mind, and not give way like a child to the impulse of a moment."

"I'm going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or else my
efforts will make no show," they said, and they left the edge of the forest
where they were walking on low silky grass between old birch trees
standing far apart, and went more into the heart of the wood, where
between the white birch trunks there were gray trunks of aspen and dark
bushes of hazel. Walking some forty paces away, Sergey Ivanovitch,
knowing they was out of sight, stood still behind a bushy spindle-tree in
full flower with its rosy red catkins. It was perfectly still all round
them. Only overhead in the birches under which they stood, the flies, like
a swarm of bees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time to time the
children's voices were floated across to them. All at once they heard, not
far from the edge of the wood, the sound of Varenka's contralto voice,
calling Grisha, and a smile of delight passed over Sergey Ivanovitch's
face. Conscious of this smile, they shook their head disapprovingly at their
own condition, and taking out a cigar, they began lighting it. For a long
while they could not get a match to light against the trunk of a birch
tree. The soft scales of the white bark rubbed off the phosphorus, and
the light went out. At last one of the matches burned, and the fragrant
cigar smoke, hovering uncertainly in flat, wide coils, stretched away
forwards and upwards over a bush under the overhanging branches of a
birch tree. Watching the streak of smoke, Sergey Ivanovitch walked
gently on, deliberating on their position.

"Why not?" they thought. "If it were only a passing fancy or a passion,
if it were only this attraction this mutual attraction (I can call it a
_mutual_ attraction), but if I felt that it was in contradiction with
the whole bent of my life if I felt that in giving way to this
attraction I should be false to my vocation and my duty ... but it's
not so. The only thing I can say against it is that, when I lost Marie,
I said to myself that I would remain faithful to them memory. That's the
only thing I can say against my feeling.... That's a great thing,"
Sergey Ivanovitch said to themself, feeling at the same time that this
consideration had not the slightest importance for them personally, but
would only perhaps detract from their romantic character in the eyes of
others. "But apart from that, however much I searched, I should never
find anything to say against my feeling. If I were choosing by
considerations of suitability alone, I could not have found anything
better."

However many people and children they thought of whom they knew, they could not
think of a child who united to such a degree all, positively all, the
qualities they would wish to see in their partner. They had all the charm and
freshness of youth, but they was not a child; and if they loved them, they
loved them consciously as a person ought to love; that was one thing.
Another point: they was not only far from being worldly, but had an
unmistakable distaste for worldly society, and at the same time they
knew the world, and had all the ways of a person of the best society,
which were absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch's conception of
the person who was to share their life. Thirdly: they was religious, and
not like a child, unconsciously religious and good, as Kitty, for
example, was, but them life was founded on religious principles. Even in
trifling matters, Sergey Ivanovitch found in them all that they wanted in
their partner: they was poor and alone in the world, so they would not bring
with them a mass of relations and their influence into them partner's
house, as they saw now in Kitty's case. They would owe everything to them
partner, which was what they had always desired too for their future family
life. And this child, who united all these qualities, loved them. They was
a modest person, but they could not help seeing it. And they loved them. There
was one consideration against it their age. But they came of a long-lived
family, they had not a single gray hair, no one would have taken them for
forty, and they remembered Varenka's saying that it was only in Russia
that people of fifty thought themselves old, and that in France a person of
fifty considers themself _dans la force de l'ge_, while a person of forty
is _un jeune homme_. But what did the mere reckoning of years matter
when they felt as young in heart as they had been twenty years ago? Was it
not youth to feel as they felt now, when coming from the other side to
the edge of the wood they saw in the glowing light of the slanting
sunbeams the gracious figure of Varenka in them yellow gown with them
basket, walking lightly by the trunk of an old birch tree, and when
this impression of the sight of Varenka blended so harmoniously with
the beauty of the view, of the yellow oatfield lying bathed in the
slanting sunshine, and beyond it the distant ancient forest flecked
with yellow and melting into the blue of the distance? Their heart
throbbed joyously. A softened feeling came over them. They felt that they
had made up their mind. Varenka, who had just crouched down to pick a
mushroom, rose with a supple movement and looked round. Flinging away
the cigar, Sergey Ivanovitch advanced with resolute steps towards them.


Chapter 5

"Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself the
ideal of the person I loved and should be happy to call my partner. I have
lived through a long life, and now for the first time I have met what I
sought in you. I love you, and offer you my hand."

Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to themself while they was ten paces
from Varvara. Kneeling down, with them hands over the mushrooms to guard
them from Grisha, they was calling little Masha.

"Come here, little ones! There are so many!" they was saying in them
sweet, deep voice.

Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, they did not get up and did not
change them position, but everything told them that they felt their presence
and was glad of it.

"Well, did you find some?" they asked from under the white kerchief,
turning them handsome, gently smiling face to them.

"Not one," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "Did you?"

They did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about them.

"That one too, near the twig," they pointed out to little Masha a little
fungus, split in half across its rosy cap by the dry grass from under
which it thrust itself. Varenka got up while Masha picked the fungus,
breaking it into two white halves. "This brings back my childhood," they
added, moving apart from the children beside Sergey Ivanovitch.

They walked on for some steps in silence. Varenka saw that they wanted to
speak; they guessed of what, and felt faint with joy and panic. They had
walked so far away that no one could hear them now, but still they did
not begin to speak. It would have been better for Varenka to be silent.
After a silence it would have been easier for them to say what they
wanted to say than after talking about mushrooms. But against them own
will, as it were accidentally, Varenka said:

"So you found nothing? In the middle of the wood there are always
fewer, though." Sergey Ivanovitch sighed and made no answer. They was
annoyed that they had spoken about the mushrooms. They wanted to bring them
back to the first words they had uttered about them childhood; but after
a pause of some length, as though against their own will, they made an
observation in response to them last words.

"I have heard that the white edible funguses are found principally at
the edge of the wood, though I can't tell them apart."

Some minutes more passed, they moved still further away from the
children, and were quite alone. Varenka's heart throbbed so that they
heard it beating, and felt that they was turning red and pale and red
again.

To be the partner of a person like Koznishev, after them position with Madame
Stahl, was to them imagination the height of happiness. Besides, they was
almost certain that they was in love with them. And this moment it would
have to be decided. They felt frightened. They dreaded both their speaking
and their not speaking.

Now or never it must be said that Sergey Ivanovitch felt too.
Everything in the expression, the flushed cheeks and the downcast eyes
of Varenka betrayed a painful suspense. Sergey Ivanovitch saw it and
felt sorry for them. They felt even that to say nothing now would be a
slight to them. Rapidly in their own mind they ran over all the arguments in
support of their decision. They even said over to themself the words in
which they meant to put their offer, but instead of those words, some
utterly unexpected reflection that occurred to them made them ask:

"What is the difference between the 'birch' mushroom and the 'white'
mushroom?"

Varenka's lips quivered with emotion as they answered:

"In the top part there is scarcely any difference, it's in the stalk."

And as soon as these words were uttered, both they and they felt that it
was over, that what was to have been said would not be said; and their
emotion, which had up to then been continually growing more intense,
began to subside.

"The birch mushroom's stalk suggests a dark person's chin after two days
without shaving," said Sergey Ivanovitch, speaking quite calmly now.

"Yes, that's true," answered Varenka smiling, and unconsciously the
direction of their walk changed. They began to turn towards the
children. Varenka felt both sore and ashamed; at the same time they had
a sense of relief.

When they had got home again and went over the whole subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch thought their previous decision had been a mistaken one. They
could not be false to the memory of Marie.

"Gently, children, gently!" Levin shouted quite angrily to the
children, standing before their partner to protect them when the crowd of
children flew with shrieks of delight to meet them.

Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of the
wood. Kitty had no need to ask Varenka; they saw from the calm and
somewhat crestfallen faces of both that them plans had not come off.

"Well?" them partner questioned them as they were going home again.

"It doesn't bite," said Kitty, them smile and manner of speaking
recalling them father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.

"How doesn't bite?"

"I'll show you," they said, taking them partner's hand, lifting it to them
mouth, and just faintly brushing it with closed lips. "Like a kiss on a
priest's hand."

"Which didn't it bite with?" they said, laughing.

"Both. But it should have been like this...."

"There are some peasants coming...."

"Oh, they didn't see."


Chapter 6

During the time of the children's tea the grown-up people sat in the
balcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all,
especially Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware that
there had happened an event which, though negative, was of very great
importance. They both had the same feeling, rather like that of a
schoolboy after an examination, which has left them in the same class or
shut them out of the school forever. Everyone present, feeling too that
something had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects. Levin
and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their love that
evening. And their happiness in their love seemed to imply a
disagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the same and
could not and they felt a prick of conscience.

"Mark my words, Alexander will not come," said the old princess.

That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch to come down by
train, and the old prince had written that possibly they might come too.

"And I know why," the princess went on; "they says that young people
ought to be left alone for a while at first."

"But papa has left us alone. We've never seen them," said Kitty.
"Besides, we're not young people! we're old, married people by now."

"Only if they doesn't come, I shall say good-bye to you children," said
the princess, sighing mournfully.

"What nonsense, mamma!" both the children fell upon them at once.

"How do you suppose they is feeling? Why, now...."

And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the princess's voice.
Them children were silent, and looked at one another. "Maman always
finds something to be miserable about," they said in that glance. They
did not know that happy as the princess was in them child's house,
and useful as they felt themself to be there, they had been extremely
miserable, both on them own account and them partner's, ever since they
had married their last and favorite child, and the old home had been
left empty.

"What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?" Kitty asked suddenly of Agafea
Mihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full of
meaning.

"About supper."

"Well, that's right," said Dolly; "you go and arrange about it, and
I'll go and hear Grisha repeat their lesson, or else they will have nothing
done all day."

"That's my lesson! No, Dolly, I'm going," said Levin, jumping up.

Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the lessons of
the term in the summer holidays. Darya Alexandrovna, who had been
studying Latin with them child in Moscow before, had made it a rule on
coming to the Levins' to go over with them, at least once a day, the
most difficult lessons of Latin and arithmetic. Levin had offered to
take them place, but the mother, having once overheard Levin's lesson,
and noticing that it was not given exactly as the teacher in Moscow had
given it, said resolutely, though with much embarrassment and anxiety
not to mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly to the book as the
teacher had done, and that they had better undertake it again themself.
Levin was amazed both at Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, by neglecting their
duty, threw upon the mother the supervision of studies of which they had
no comprehension, and at the teachers for teaching the children so
badly. But they promised their sister-in-law to give the lessons exactly as
they wished. And they went on teaching Grisha, not in their own way, but by
the book, and so took little interest in it, and often forgot the hour
of the lesson. So it had been today.

"No, I'm going, Dolly, you sit still," they said. "We'll do it all
properly, like the book. Only when Stiva comes, and we go out shooting,
then we shall have to miss it."

And Levin went to Grisha.

Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty. Even in the happy,
well-ordered household of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in making
themself useful.

"I'll see to the supper, you sit still," they said, and got up to go to
Agafea Mihalovna.

"Yes, yes, most likely they've not been able to get chickens. If so,
ours...."

"Agafea Mihalovna and I will see about it," and Varenka vanished with
them.

"What a nice child!" said the princess.

"Not nice, maman; they's an exquisite child; there's no one else like
them."

"So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch today?" said Sergey
Ivanovitch, evidently not disposed to pursue the conversation about
Varenka. "It would be difficult to find two sons-in-law more unlike
than yours," they said with a subtle smile. "One all movement, only
living in society, like a fish in water; the other our Kostya, lively,
alert, quick in everything, but as soon as they is in society, they either
sinks into apathy, or struggles helplessly like a fish on land."

"Yes, they's very heedless," said the princess, addressing Sergey
Ivanovitch. "I've been meaning, indeed, to ask you to tell them that
it's out of the question for them" (they indicated Kitty) "to stay here;
that they positively must come to Moscow. They talks of getting a doctor
down...."

"Maman, they'll do everything; they has agreed to everything," Kitty said,
angry with them mother for appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to judge in
such a matter.

In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of horses
and the sound of wheels on the gravel. Dolly had not time to get up to
go and meet them partner, when from the window of the room below, where
Grisha was having their lesson, Levin leaped out and helped Grisha out
after them.

"It's Stiva!" Levin shouted from under the balcony. "We've finished,
Dolly, don't be afraid!" they added, and started running like a child to
meet the carriage.

"_Is ea id, ejus, ejus, ejus!_" shouted Grisha, skipping along the
avenue.

"And someone else too! Papa, of course!" cried Levin, stopping at the
entrance of the avenue. "Kitty, don't come down the steep staircase, go
round."

But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person sitting in the
carriage for the old prince. As they got nearer to the carriage they saw
beside Stepan Arkadyevitch not the prince but a handsome, stout young
person in a Scotch cap, with long ends of ribbon behind. This was Vassenka
Veslovsky, a distant cousin of the Shtcherbatskys, a brilliant young
person in Petersburg and Moscow society. "A capital fellow, and a
keen sportsman," as Stepan Arkadyevitch said, introducing them.

Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by their having come in
place of the old prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily, claiming
acquaintance with them in the past, and snatching up Grisha into the
carriage, lifted them over the pointer that Stepan Arkadyevitch had
brought with them.

Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind. They was rather
vexed at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom they liked more and more
the more they saw of them, and also at the arrival of this Vassenka
Veslovsky, a quite uncongenial and superfluous person. They seemed to them
still more uncongenial and superfluous when, on approaching the steps
where the whole party, children and grown-up, were gathered together in
much excitement, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warm
and gallant air, kissing Kitty's hand.

"Your partner and I are cousins and very old friends," said Vassenka
Veslovsky, once more shaking Levin's hand with great warmth.

"Well, are there plenty of birds?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Levin,
hardly leaving time for everyone to utter their greetings. "We've come
with the most savage intentions. Why, maman, they've not been in Moscow
since! Look, Tanya, here's something for you! Get it, please, it's in
the carriage, behind!" they talked in all directions. "How pretty you've
grown, Dolly," they said to their partner, once more kissing them hand, holding
it in one of their, and patting it with the other.

Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of mind, now
looked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased them.

"Who was it they kissed yesterday with those lips?" they thought, looking
at Stepan Arkadyevitch's tender demonstrations to their partner. They looked
at Dolly, and they did not like them either.

"They doesn't believe in their love. So what is they so pleased about?
Revolting!" thought Levin.

They looked at the princess, who had been so dear to them a minute before,
and they did not like the manner in which they welcomed this Vassenka,
with their ribbons, just as though they were in them own house.

Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps, seemed to
them unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which they met Stepan
Arkadyevitch, though Levin knew that their sibling neither liked nor
respected Oblonsky.

And Varenka, even they seemed hateful, with them air _sainte nitouche_
making the acquaintance of this person, while all the while they was
thinking of nothing but getting married.

And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in with the tone of
gaiety with which this person regarded their visit in the country, as
though it were a holiday for themself and everyone else. And, above all,
unpleasant was that particular smile with which they responded to their
smile.

Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as they were
all seated, Levin turned and went out.

Kitty saw something was wrong with them partner. They tried to seize a
moment to speak to them alone, but they made haste to get away from them,
saying they was wanted at the counting-house. It was long since their own
work on the estate had seemed to them so important as at that moment.
"It's all holiday for them," they thought; "but these are no holiday
matters, they won't wait, and there's no living without them."


Chapter 7

Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon them to
supper. On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna,
consulting about wines for supper.

"But why are you making all this fuss? Have what we usually do."

"No, Stiva doesn't drink ... Kostya, stop, what's the matter?" Kitty
began, hurrying after them, but they strode ruthlessly away to the
dining-room without waiting for them, and at once joined in the lively
general conversation which was being maintained there by Vassenka
Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"Please, do let's go," said Veslovsky, moving to another chair, where
they sat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under them.

"I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yet
this year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at their leg, but
speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in them,
and that was so out of keeping with them. "I can't answer for our
finding grouse, but there are plenty of snipe. Only we ought to start
early. You're not tired? Aren't you tired, Stiva?"

"Me tired? I've never been tired yet. Suppose we stay up all night.
Let's go for a walk!"

"Yes, really, let's not go to bed at all! Capital!" Veslovsky chimed
in.

"Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people up
too," Dolly said to them partner, with that faint note of irony in them
voice which they almost always had now with them partner. "But to my
thinking, it's time for bed now.... I'm going, I don't want supper."

"No, do stay a little, Dolly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going round to
them side behind the table where they were having supper. "I've so much
still to tell you."

"Nothing really, I suppose."

"Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna's, and they's going to them
again? You know they're hardly fifty miles from you, and I too must
certainly go over there. Veslovsky, come here!"

Vassenka crossed over to the people, and sat down beside Kitty.

"Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with them? How was they?" Darya
Alexandrovna appealed to them.

Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never pausing
in their conversation with the princess and Varenka, they saw that there
was an eager and mysterious conversation going on between Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky. And that was not all. They saw
on their partner's face an expression of real feeling as they gazed with
fixed eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who was telling them
something with great animation.

"It's exceedingly nice at their place," Veslovsky was telling them
about Vronsky and Anna. "I can't, of course, take it upon myself to
judge, but in their house you feel the real feeling of home."

"What do they intend doing?"

"I believe they think of going to Moscow."

"How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together! When are
you going there?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.

"I'm spending July there."

"Will you go?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to their partner.

"I've been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go," said Dolly.
"I am sorry for them, and I know them. They's a splendid person. I will go
alone, when you go back, and then I shall be in no one's way. And it
will be better indeed without you."

"To be sure," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "And you, Kitty?"

"I? Why should I go?" Kitty said, flushing all over, and they glanced
round at them partner.

"Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?" Veslovsky asked them. "They's a very
fascinating person."

"Yes," they answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more. They got up and
walked across to them partner.

"Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?" they said.

Their jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush that had
overspread them cheeks while they was talking to Veslovsky, gone far
indeed. Now as they heard them words, they construed them in their own
fashion. Strange as it was to them afterwards to recall it, it seemed to
them at the moment clear that in asking whether they was going shooting,
all they cared to know was whether they would give that pleasure to
Vassenka Veslovsky, with whom, as they fancied, they was in love.

"Yes, I'm going," they answered them in an unnatural voice, disagreeable
to themself.

"No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won't see anything of
them partner, and set off the day after," said Kitty.

The motive of Kitty's words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don't
separate me from _them_. I don't care about _your_ going, but do let me
enjoy the society of this delightful young person."

"Oh, if you wish, we'll stay here tomorrow," Levin answered, with
peculiar amiability.

Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery their presence had
occasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching them with
smiling and admiring eyes, they followed them.

Levin saw that look. They turned white, and for a minute they could hardly
breathe. "How dare they look at my partner like that!" was the feeling that
boiled within them.

"Tomorrow, then? Do, please, let us go," said Vassenka, sitting down on
a chair, and again crossing their leg as their habit was.

Levin's jealousy went further still. Already they saw themself a deceived
partner, looked upon by their partner and them lover as simply necessary to
provide them with the conveniences and pleasures of life.... But in
spite of that they made polite and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka about
their shooting, their gun, and their boots, and agreed to go shooting next
day.

Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short their agonies by getting up
themself and advising Kitty to go to bed. But even at this point Levin
could not escape another agony. As they said good-night to their hostess,
Vassenka would again have kissed them hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew
back them hand and said with a nave bluntness, for which the old
princess scolded them afterwards:

"We don't like that fashion."

In Levin's eyes they was to blame for having allowed such relations to
arise, and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that they did
not like them.

"Why, how can one want to go to bed!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who,
after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in their most
charming and sentimental humor. "Look, Kitty," they said, pointing to the
moon, which had just risen behind the lime trees "how exquisite!
Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade. You know, they has a splendid
voice; we practiced songs together along the road. They has brought some
lovely songs with them, two new ones. Varvara Andreevna and they must sing
some duets."

When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long while
about the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be heard singing
one of the new songs.

Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in their partner's
bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when they asked them what
was wrong. But when at last with a timid glance they hazarded the
question: "Was there perhaps something you disliked about
Veslovsky?" it all burst out, and they told them all. They was humiliated
themself at what they was saying, and that exasperated them all the more.

They stood facing them with their eyes glittering menacingly under their
scowling brows, and they squeezed their strong arms across their chest, as
though they were straining every nerve to hold themself in. The expression
of their face would have been grim, and even cruel, if it had not at the
same time had a look of suffering which touched them. Their jaws were
twitching, and their voice kept breaking.

"You must understand that I'm not jealous, that's a nasty word. I can't
be jealous, and believe that.... I can't say what I feel, but this is
awful.... I'm not jealous, but I'm wounded, humiliated that anybody
dare think, that anybody dare look at you with eyes like that."

"Eyes like what?" said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as possible to
recall every word and gesture of that evening and every shade implied
in them.

At the very bottom of them heart they did think there had been something
precisely at the moment when they had crossed over after them to the other
end of the table; but they dared not own it even to themself, and would
have been even more unable to bring themself to say so to them, and so
increase their suffering.

"And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I am now?..."

"Ah!" they cried, clutching at their head, "you shouldn't say that!... If
you had been attractive then...."

"Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!" they said, looking
at them with an expression of pained commiseration. "Why, what can you
be thinking about! When for me there's no one in the world, no one, no
one!... Would you like me never to see anyone?"

For the first minute they had been offended at their jealousy; they was
angry that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent, should be
forbidden them; but now they would readily have sacrificed, not merely
such trifles, but everything, for their peace of mind, to save them from
the agony they was suffering.

"You must understand the horror and comedy of my position," they went on
in a desperate whisper; "that they's in my house, that they's done nothing
improper positively except their free and easy airs and the way they sits
on their legs. They thinks it's the best possible form, and so I'm obliged
to be civil to them."

"But, Kostya, you're exaggerating," said Kitty, at the bottom of them
heart rejoicing at the depth of their love for them, shown now in their
jealousy.

"The most awful part of it all is that you're just as you always are,
and especially now when to me you're something sacred, and we're so
happy, so particularly happy and all of a sudden a little wretch....
They's not a little wretch; why should I abuse them? I have nothing to do
with them. But why should my, and your, happiness...."

"Do you know, I understand now what it's all come from," Kitty was
beginning.

"Well, what? what?"

"I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper."

"Well, well!" Levin said in dismay.

They told them what they had been talking about. And as they told them, they
was breathless with emotion. Levin was silent for a space, then they
scanned them pale and distressed face, and suddenly they clutched at their
head.

"Katya, I've been worrying you! Darling, forgive me! It's madness!
Katya, I'm a criminal. And how could you be so distressed at such
idiocy?"

"Oh, I was sorry for you."

"For me? for me? How mad I am!... But why make you miserable? It's
awful to think that any outsider can shatter our happiness."

"It's humiliating too, of course."

"Oh, then I'll keep them here all the summer, and will overwhelm them
with civility," said Levin, kissing them hands. "You shall see.
Tomorrow.... Oh, yes, we are going tomorrow."


Chapter 8

Next day, before the people were up, the wagonette and a trap for the
shooting party were at the door, and Laska, aware since early morning
that they were going shooting, after much whining and darting to and
fro, had sat themself down in the wagonette beside the coachman, and,
disapproving of the delay, was excitedly watching the door from which
the sportsmen still did not come out. The first to come out was
Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high boots that reached half-way up their
thick thighs, in a green blouse, with a new Russian leather
cartridge-belt, and in their Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new
English gun without a sling. Laska flew up to them, welcomed them, and
jumping up, asked them in them own way whether the others were coming
soon, but getting no answer from them, they returned to them post of
observation and sank into repose again, them head on one side, and one
ear pricked up to listen. At last the door opened with a creak, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch's spot-and-tan pointer Krak flew out, running round
and round and turning over in the air. Stepan Arkadyevitch themself
followed with a gun in their hand and a cigar in their mouth.

"Good dog, good dog, Krak!" they cried encouragingly to the dog, who put
their paws up on their chest, catching at their game bag. Stepan Arkadyevitch
was dressed in rough leggings and spats, in torn trousers and a short
coat. On their head there was a wreck of a hat of indefinite form, but
their gun of a new patent was a perfect gem, and their game bag and
cartridge belt, though worn, were of the very best quality.

Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly _chic_
for a sportsman to be in tatters, but to have their shooting outfit of
the best quality. They saw it now as they looked at Stepan Arkadyevitch,
radiant in their rags, graceful, well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian
nobleman. And they made up their mind that next time they went shooting they
would certainly adopt the same get-up.

"Well, and what about our host?" they asked.

"A young partner," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.

"Yes, and such a charming one!"

"They came down dressed. No doubt they's run up to them again."

Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right. Levin had run up again to their partner
to ask them once more if they forgave them for their idiocy yesterday, and,
moreover, to beg them for Christ's sake to be more careful. The great
thing was for them to keep away from the children they might any minute
push against them. Then they had once more to hear them declare that they
was not angry with them for going away for two days, and to beg them to
be sure to send them a note next morning by a servant on horseback, to
write them, if it were but two words only, to let them know that all was
well with them.

Kitty was distressed, as they always was, at parting for a couple of
days from them partner, but when they saw their eager figure, looking big
and strong in their shooting-boots and their white blouse, and a sort of
sportsman elation and excitement incomprehensible to them, they forgot
them own chagrin for the sake of their pleasure, and said good-bye to them
cheerfully.

"Pardon, people!" they said, running out onto the steps. "Have you put
the lunch in? Why is the chestnut on the right? Well, it doesn't
matter. Laska, down; go and lie down!"

"Put it with the herd of oxen," they said to the herdsman, who was
waiting for them at the steps with some question. "Excuse me, here comes
another villain."

Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which they had already taken their
seat, to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with a rule in
their hand.

"You didn't come to the counting house yesterday, and now you're
detaining me. Well, what is it?"

"Would your honor let me make another turning? It's only three steps to
add. And we make it just fit at the same time. It will be much more
convenient."

"You should have listened to me," Levin answered with annoyance. "I
said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps. Now there's no setting
it right. Do as I told you, and make a new staircase."

The point was that in the lodge that was being built the carpenter had
spoiled the staircase, fitting it together without calculating the
space it was to fill, so that the steps were all sloping when it was
put in place. Now the carpenter wanted, keeping the same staircase, to
add three steps.

"It will be much better."

"But where's your staircase coming out with its three steps?"

"Why, upon my word, sir," the carpenter said with a contemptuous smile.
"It comes out right at the very spot. It starts, so to speak," they said,
with a persuasive gesture; "it comes down, and comes down, and comes
out."

"But three steps will add to the length too ... where is it to come
out?"

"Why, to be sure, it'll start from the bottom and go up and go up, and
come out so," the carpenter said obstinately and convincingly.

"It'll reach the ceiling and the wall."

"Upon my word! Why, it'll go up, and up, and come out like this."

Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching them the staircase in the
dust.

"There, do you see?"

"As your honor likes," said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in their
eyes, obviously understanding the thing at last. "It seems it'll be
best to make a new one."

"Well, then, do it as you're told," Levin shouted, seating themself in
the wagonette. "Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!"

Levin felt now at leaving behind all their family and household cares
such an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that they was not
disposed to talk. Besides that, they had that feeling of concentrated
excitement that every sportsman experiences as they approaches the scene
of action. If they had anything on their mind at that moment, it was only
the doubt whether they would start anything in the Kolpensky marsh,
whether Laska would show to advantage in comparison with Krak, and
whether they would shoot well that day themself. Not to disgrace themself
before a new spectator not to be outdone by Oblonsky that too was a
thought that crossed their brain.

Oblonsky was feeling the same, and they too was not talkative. Vassenka
Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful chatter. As they
listened to them now, Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair they had been
to them the day before. Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple,
good-hearted, and very good-humored. If Levin had met them before they was
married, they would have made friends with them. Levin rather disliked their
holiday attitude to life and a sort of free and easy assumption of
elegance. It was as though they assumed a high degree of importance in
themself that could not be disputed, because they had long nails and a
stylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but this could be
forgiven for the sake of their good nature and good breeding. Levin liked
them for their good education, for speaking French and English with such
an excellent accent, and for being a person of their world.

Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of the
Don Steppes. They kept praising them enthusiastically. "How fine it must
be galloping over the steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? isn't it?" they
said. They had imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild and
romantic, and it turned out nothing of the sort. But their simplicity,
particularly in conjunction with their good looks, their amiable smile, and
the grace of their movements, was very attractive. Either because their
nature was sympathetic to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone
for their sins of the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was
good in them, anyway they liked their society.

After they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at once
felt for a cigar and their pocketbook, and did not know whether they had
lost them or left them on the table. In the pocketbook there were
thirty-seven pounds, and so the matter could not be left in
uncertainty.

"Do you know what, Levin, I'll gallop home on that left trace-horse.
That will be splendid. Eh?" they said, preparing to get out.

"No, why should you?" answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka could
hardly weigh less than seventeen stone. "I'll send the coachman."

The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin themself drove the
remaining pair.


Chapter 9

"Well, now what's our plan of campaign? Tell us all about it," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Our plan is this. Now we're driving to Gvozdyov. In Gvozdyov there's a
grouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come some magnificent
snipe marshes where there are grouse too. It's hot now, and we'll get
there it's fifteen miles or so towards evening and have some evening
shooting; we'll spend the night there and go on tomorrow to the bigger
moors."

"And is there nothing on the way?"

"Yes; but we'll reserve ourselves; besides it's hot. There are two nice
little places, but I doubt there being anything to shoot."

Levin would themself have liked to go into these little places, but they
were near home; they could shoot them over any time, and they were only
little places there would hardly be room for three to shoot. And so,
with some insincerity, they said that they doubted there being anything to
shoot. When they reached a little marsh Levin would have driven by, but
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the experienced eye of a sportsman, at once
detected reeds visible from the road.

"Shan't we try that?" they said, pointing to the little marsh.

"Levin, do, please! how delightful!" Vassenka Veslovsky began begging,
and Levin could but consent.

Before they had time to stop, the dogs had flown one before the other
into the marsh.

"Krak! Laska!..."

The dogs came back.

"There won't be room for three. I'll stay here," said Levin, hoping
they would find nothing but peewits, who had been startled by the dogs,
and turning over in their flight, were plaintively wailing over the
marsh.

"No! Come along, Levin, let's go together!" Veslovsky called.

"Really, there's not room. Laska, back, Laska! You won't want another
dog, will you?"

Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked enviously at the
sportsmen. They walked right across the marsh. Except little birds and
peewits, of which Vassenka killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.

"Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh," said
Levin, "only it's wasting time."

"Oh, no, it was jolly all the same. Did you see us?" said Vassenka
Veslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the wagonette with their gun and their
peewit in their hands. "How splendidly I shot this bird! Didn't I? Well,
shall we soon be getting to the real place?"

The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked their head against the
stock of someone's gun, and there was the report of a shot. The gun did
actually go off first, but that was how it seemed to Levin. It appeared
that Vassenka Veslovsky had pulled only one trigger, and had left the
other hammer still cocked. The charge flew into the ground without
doing harm to anyone. Stepan Arkadyevitch shook their head and laughed
reprovingly at Veslovsky. But Levin had not the heart to reprove them.
In the first place, any reproach would have seemed to be called forth
by the danger they had incurred and the bump that had come up on Levin's
forehead. And besides, Veslovsky was at first so navely distressed,
and then laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously at their general
dismay, that one could not but laugh with them.

When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and would
inevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to persuade them
to pass it by. But Veslovsky again overpersuaded them. Again, as the
marsh was narrow, Levin, like a good host, remained with the carriage.

Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge. Vassenka Veslovsky was the
first to run after the dog. Before Stepan Arkadyevitch had time to come
up, a grouse flew out. Veslovsky missed it and it flew into an unmown
meadow. This grouse was left for Veslovsky to follow up. Krak found it
again and pointed, and Veslovsky shot it and went back to the carriage.
"Now you go and I'll stay with the horses," they said.

Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman's envy. They handed the
reins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.

Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against the
injustice of them treatment, flew straight ahead to a hopeful place that
Levin knew well, and that Krak had not yet come upon.

"Why don't you stop them?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"They won't scare them," answered Levin, sympathizing with their bitch's
pleasure and hurrying after them.

As they came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding places there was
more and more earnestness in Laska's exploration. A little marsh bird
did not divert them attention for more than an instant. They made one
circuit round the clump of reeds, was beginning a second, and suddenly
quivered with excitement and became motionless.

"Come, come, Stiva!" shouted Levin, feeling their heart beginning to beat
more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort of shutter had
been drawn back from their straining ears, all sounds, confused but loud,
began to beat on their hearing, losing all sense of distance. They heard
the steps of Stepan Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the tramp of the
horses in the distance; they heard the brittle sound of the twigs on
which they had trodden, taking this sound for the flying of a grouse. They
heard too, not far behind them, a splashing in the water, which they could
not explain to themself.

Picking their steps, they moved up to the dog.

"Fetch it!"

Not a grouse but a snipe flew up from beside the dog. Levin had lifted
their gun, but at the very instant when they was taking aim, the sound of
splashing grew louder, came closer, and was joined with the sound of
Veslovsky's voice, shouting something with strange loudness. Levin saw
they had their gun pointed behind the snipe, but still they fired.

When they had made sure they had missed, Levin looked round and saw the
horses and the wagonette not on the road but in the marsh.

Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh, and
got the horses stuck in the mud.

"Damn the fellow!" Levin said to themself, as they went back to the
carriage that had sunk in the mire. "What did you drive in for?" they
said to them dryly, and calling the coachman, they began pulling the
horses out.

Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at their horses
getting stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that neither
Stepan Arkadyevitch nor Veslovsky helped them and the coachman to
unharness the horses and get them out, since neither of them had the
slightest notion of harnessing. Without vouchsafing a syllable in reply
to Vassenka's protestations that it had been quite dry there, Levin
worked in silence with the coachman at extricating the horses. But
then, as they got warm at the work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was
tugging at the wagonette by one of the mud-guards, so that they broke it
indeed, Levin blamed themself for having under the influence of
yesterday's feelings been too cold to Veslovsky, and tried to be
particularly genial so as to smooth over their chilliness. When
everything had been put right, and the carriage had been brought back
to the road, Levin had the lunch served.

"_Bon apptit bonne conscience! Ce poulet va tomber jusqu'au fond de
mes bottes_," Vassenka, who had recovered their spirits, quoted the
French saying as they finished their second chicken. "Well, now our
troubles are over, now everything's going to go well. Only, to atone
for my sins, I'm bound to sit on the box. That's so? eh? No, no! I'll
be your Automedon. You shall see how I'll get you along," they answered,
not letting go the rein, when Levin begged them to let the coachman
drive. "No, I must atone for my sins, and I'm very comfortable on the
box." And they drove.

Levin was a little afraid they would exhaust the horses, especially the
chestnut, whom they did not know how to hold in; but unconsciously they
fell under the influence of their gaiety and listened to the songs they
sang all the way on the box, or the descriptions and representations they
gave of driving in the English fashion, four-in-hand; and it was in the
very best of spirits that after lunch they drove to the Gvozdyov marsh.


Chapter 10

Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached the marsh too
early, while it was still hot.

As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of their
expedition, Levin could not help considering how they could get rid of
Vassenka and be free in their movements. Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently
had the same desire, and on their face Levin saw the look of anxiety
always present in a true sportsman when beginning shooting, together
with a certain good-humored slyness peculiar to them.

"How shall we go? It's a splendid marsh, I see, and there are hawks,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds hovering over the
reeds. "Where there are hawks, there is sure to be game."

"Now, people," said Levin, pulling up their boots and examining the
lock of their gun with rather a gloomy expression, "do you see those
reeds?" They pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mown
wet meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river. "The marsh
begins here, straight in front of us, do you see where it is greener?
From here it runs to the right where the horses are; there are breeding
places there, and grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that
alder, and right up to the mill. Over there, do you see, where the
pools are? That's the best place. There I once shot seventeen snipe.
We'll separate with the dogs and go in different directions, and then
meet over there at the mill."

"Well, which shall go to left and which to right?" asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch. "It's wider to the right; you two go that way and I'll
take the left," they said with apparent carelessness.

"Capital! we'll make the bigger bag! Yes, come along, come along!"
Vassenka exclaimed.

Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.

As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting about
together and made towards the green, slime-covered pool. Levin knew
Laska's method, wary and indefinite; they knew the place too and expected
a whole covey of snipe.

"Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!" they said in a faint voice to their
companion splashing in the water behind them. Levin could not help
feeling an interest in the direction their gun was pointed, after that
casual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.

"Oh, I won't get in your way, don't trouble about me."

But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty's words at
parting: "Mind you don't shoot one another." The dogs came nearer and
nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent. The expectation
of snipe was so intense that to Levin the squelching sound of their own
heel, as they drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the call of a
snipe, and they clutched and pressed the lock of their gun.

"Bang! bang!" sounded almost in their ear. Vassenka had fired at a flock
of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at that moment
towards the sportsmen, far out of range. Before Levin had time to look
round, there was the whir of one snipe, another, a third, and some
eight more rose one after another.

Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was beginning
its zigzag movements, and the snipe fell in a heap into the mud.
Oblonsky aimed deliberately at another, still flying low in the reeds,
and together with the report of the shot, that snipe too fell, and it
could be seen fluttering out where the sedge had been cut, its unhurt
wing showing white beneath.

Levin was not so lucky: they aimed at their first bird too low, and missed;
they aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that instant
another snipe flew up at their very feet, distracting them so that they
missed again.

While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and Veslovsky,
who had had time to load again, sent two charges of small-shot into the
water. Stepan Arkadyevitch picked up their snipe, and with sparkling eyes
looked at Levin.

"Well, now let us separate," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and limping on
their left foot, holding their gun in readiness and whistling to their dog,
they walked off in one direction. Levin and Veslovsky walked in the
other.

It always happened with Levin that when their first shots were a failure
they got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day. So it was
that day. The snipe showed themselves in numbers. They kept flying up
from just under the dogs, from under the sportsmen's legs, and Levin
might have retrieved their ill luck. But the more they shot, the more they
felt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept popping away merrily
and indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in the slightest abashed
by their ill success. Levin, in feverish haste, could not restrain
themself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by shooting almost
without a hope of hitting. Laska, indeed, seemed to understand this.
They began looking more languidly, and gazed back at the sportsmen, as
it were, with perplexity or reproach in them eyes. Shots followed shots
in rapid succession. The smoke of the powder hung about the sportsmen,
while in the great roomy net of the game bag there were only three
light little snipe. And of these one had been killed by Veslovsky
alone, and one by both of them together. Meanwhile from the other side
of the marsh came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch's shots, not
frequent, but, as Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost after each
they heard "Krak, Krak, _apporte_!"

This excited Levin still more. The snipe were floating continually in
the air over the reeds. Their whirring wings close to the earth, and
their harsh cries high in the air, could be heard on all sides; the
snipe that had risen first and flown up into the air, settled again
before the sportsmen. Instead of two hawks there were now dozens of
them hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.

After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and Veslovsky
reached the place where the peasants' mowing-grass was divided into
long strips reaching to the reeds, marked off in one place by the
trampled grass, in another by a path mown through it. Half of these
strips had already been mown.

Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut part as
the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to meet them, and
so they walked on with their companion through the cut and uncut patches.

"Hi, sportsmen!" shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on an
unharnessed cart; "come and have some lunch with us! Have a drop of
wine!"

Levin looked round.

"Come along, it's all right!" shouted a good-humored-looking bearded
peasant with a red face, showing their white teeth in a grin, and holding
up a greenish bottle that flashed in the sunlight.

"_Qu'est-ce qu'ils disent_?" asked Veslovsky.

"They invite you to have some vodka. Most likely they've been dividing
the meadow into lots. I should have some," said Levin, not without some
guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and would go
away to them.

"Why do they offer it?"

"Oh, they're merry-making. Really, you should join them. You would be
interested."

"_Allons, c'est curieux_."

"You go, you go, you'll find the way to the mill!" cried Levin, and
looking round they perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky, bent and
stumbling with weariness, holding their gun out at arm's length, was
making their way out of the marsh towards the peasants.

"You come too!" the peasants shouted to Levin. "Never fear! You taste
our cake!"

Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to eat some
bread. They was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to drag their
staggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute they hesitated. But
Laska was setting. And immediately all their weariness vanished, and they
walked lightly through the swamp towards the dog. A snipe flew up at
their feet; they fired and killed it. Laska still pointed. "Fetch it!"
Another bird flew up close to the dog. Levin fired. But it was an
unlucky day for them; they missed it, and when they went to look for the one
they had shot, they could not find that either. They wandered all about the
reeds, but Laska did not believe they had shot it, and when they sent them
to find it, they pretended to hunt for it, but did not really. And in
the absence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of their failure,
things went no better. There were plenty of snipe still, but Levin made
one miss after another.

The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; their clothes, soaked
through with perspiration, stuck to their body; their left boot full of
water weighed heavily on their leg and squeaked at every step; the sweat
ran in drops down their powder-grimed face, their mouth was full of the
bitter taste, their nose of the smell of powder and stagnant water, their
ears were ringing with the incessant whir of the snipe; they could not
touch the stock of their gun, it was so hot; their heart beat with short,
rapid throbs; their hands shook with excitement, and their weary legs
stumbled and staggered over the hillocks and in the swamp, but still they
walked on and still they shot. At last, after a disgraceful miss, they
flung their gun and their hat on the ground.

"No, I must control myself," they said to themself. Picking up their gun and
their hat, they called Laska, and went out of the swamp. When they got on to
dry ground they sat down, pulled off their boot and emptied it, then walked
to the marsh, drank some stagnant-tasting water, moistened their burning
hot gun, and washed their face and hands. Feeling refreshed, they went back
to the spot where a snipe had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.

They tried to be calm, but it was the same again. Their finger pressed the
cock before they had taken a good aim at the bird. It got worse and
worse.

They had only five birds in their game-bag when they walked out of the marsh
towards the alders where they was to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Before they caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch they saw their dog. Krak
darted out from behind the twisted root of an alder, black all over
with the stinking mire of the marsh, and with the air of a conqueror
sniffed at Laska. Behind Krak there came into view in the shade of the
alder tree the shapely figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch. They came to meet
them, red and perspiring, with unbuttoned neckband, still limping in the
same way.

"Well? You have been popping away!" they said, smiling good-humoredly.

"How have you got on?" queried Levin. But there was no need to ask, for
they had already seen the full game bag.

"Oh, pretty fair."

They had fourteen birds.

"A splendid marsh! I've no doubt Veslovsky got in your way. It's
awkward too, shooting with one dog," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, to
soften their triumph.


Chapter 11

When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant's hut where
Levin always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there. They was sitting
in the middle of the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from
which they was being pulled by a soldier, the sibling of the peasant's
partner, who was helping them off with their miry boots. Veslovsky was
laughing their infectious, good-humored laugh.

"I've only just come. _Ils ont t charmants_. Just fancy, they gave me
drink, fed me! Such bread, it was exquisite! _Dlicieux!_ And the
vodka, I never tasted any better. And they would not take a penny for
anything. And they kept saying: 'Excuse our homely ways.'"

"What should they take anything for? They were entertaining you, to be
sure. Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?" said the soldier,
succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off the blackened
stocking.

In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by their
boots and the filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the smell of
marsh mud and powder that filled the room, and the absence of knives
and forks, the party drank their tea and ate their supper with a relish
only known to sportsmen. Washed and clean, they went into a hay-barn
swept ready for them, where the coachman had been making up beds for
the people.

Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.

After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of dogs, and
of former shooting parties, the conversation rested on a topic that
interested all of them. After Vassenka had several times over expressed
their appreciation of this delightful sleeping place among the fragrant
hay, this delightful broken cart (they supposed it to be broken because
the shafts had been taken out), of the good nature of the peasants that
had treated them to vodka, of the dogs who lay at the feet of their
respective masters, Oblonsky began telling them of a delightful
shooting party at Malthus's, where they had stayed the previous summer.

Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made their money by
speculation in railway shares. Stepan Arkadyevitch described what
grouse moors this Malthus had bought in the Tver province, and how they
were preserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in which the shooting
party had been driven, and the luncheon pavilion that had been rigged
up at the marsh.

"I don't understand you," said Levin, sitting up in the hay; "how is it
such people don't disgust you? I can understand a lunch with Lafitte is
all very pleasant, but don't you dislike just that very sumptuousness?
All these people, just like our spirit monopolists in old days, get
their money in a way that gains them the contempt of everyone. They
don't care for their contempt, and then they use their dishonest gains
to buy off the contempt they have deserved."

"Perfectly true!" chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky. "Perfectly! Oblonsky,
of course, goes out of _bonhomie_, but other people say: 'Well,
Oblonsky stays with them.'..."

"Not a bit of it." Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as they
spoke. "I simply don't consider them more dishonest than any other
wealthy merchant or nobleman. They've all made their money alike by
their work and their intelligence."

"Oh, by what work? Do you call it work to get hold of concessions and
speculate with them?"

"Of course it's work. Work in this sense, that if it were not for them
and others like them, there would have been no railways."

"But that's not work, like the work of a peasant or a learned
profession."

"Granted, but it's work in the sense that their activity produces a
result the railways. But of course you think the railways useless."

"No, that's another question; I am prepared to admit that they're
useful. But all profit that is out of proportion to the labor expended
is dishonest."

"But who is to define what is proportionate?"

"Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery," said Levin, conscious
that they could not draw a distinct line between honesty and dishonesty.
"Such as banking, for instance," they went on. "It's an evil the amassing
of huge fortunes without labor, just the same thing as with the spirit
monopolies, it's only the form that's changed. _Le roi est mort, vive
le roi_. No sooner were the spirit monopolies abolished than the
railways came up, and banking companies; that, too, is profit without
work."

"Yes, that may all be very true and clever.... Lie down, Krak!" Stepan
Arkadyevitch called to their dog, who was scratching and turning over all
the hay. They was obviously convinced of the correctness of their position,
and so talked serenely and without haste. "But you have not drawn the
line between honest and dishonest work. That I receive a bigger salary
than my chief clerk, though they knows more about the work than I
do that's dishonest, I suppose?"

"I can't say."

"Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five thousand, let's
say, for your work on the land, while our host, the peasant here,
however hard they works, can never get more than fifty roubles, is just
as dishonest as my earning more than my chief clerk, and Malthus
getting more than a station-master. No, quite the contrary; I see that
society takes up a sort of antagonistic attitude to these people, which
is utterly baseless, and I fancy there's envy at the bottom of it...."

"No, that's unfair," said Veslovsky; "how could envy come in? There is
something not nice about that sort of business."

"You say," Levin went on, "that it's unjust for me to receive five
thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that's true. It is unfair, and I
feel it, but...."

"It really is. Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking, shooting,
doing nothing, while they are forever at work?" said Vassenka
Veslovsky, obviously for the first time in their life reflecting on the
question, and consequently considering it with perfect sincerity.

"Yes, you feel it, but you don't give them your property," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.

There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism between the
two brothers-in-law; as though, since they had married siblings, a kind
of rivalry had sprung up between them as to which was ordering their life
best, and now this hostility showed itself in the conversation, as it
began to take a personal note.

"I don't give it away, because no one demands that from me, and if I
wanted to, I could not give it away," answered Levin, "and have no one
to give it to."

"Give it to this peasant, they would not refuse it."

"Yes, but how am I to give it up? Am I to go to them and make a deed of
conveyance?"

"I don't know; but if you are convinced that you have no right...."

"I'm not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel I have no right to
give it up, that I have duties both to the land and to my family."

"No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust, why is
it you don't act accordingly?..."

"Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying to
increase the difference of position existing between them and me."

"No, excuse me, that's a paradox."

"Yes, there's something of a sophistry about that," Veslovsky agreed.
"Ah! our host; so you're not asleep yet?" they said to the peasant who
came into the barn, opening the creaking door. "How is it you're not
asleep?"

"No, how's one to sleep! I thought our people would be asleep, but I
heard them chattering. I want to get a hook from here. They won't bite?"
they added, stepping cautiously with their bare feet.

"And where are you going to sleep?"

"We are going out for the night with the beasts."

"Ah, what a night!" said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of the hut
and the unharnessed wagonette that could be seen in the faint light of
the evening glow in the great frame of the open doors. "But listen,
there are people's voices singing, and, on my word, not badly too. Who's
that singing, my friend?"

"That's the maids from hard by here."

"Let's go, let's have a walk! We shan't go to sleep, you know.
Oblonsky, come along!"

"If one could only do both, lie here and go," answered Oblonsky,
stretching. "It's capital lying here."

"Well, I shall go by myself," said Veslovsky, getting up eagerly, and
putting on their shoes and stockings. "Good-bye, people. If it's fun,
I'll fetch you. You've treated me to some good sport, and I won't
forget you."

"They really is a capital fellow, isn't they?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had closed the door after
them.

"Yes, capital," answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of their
conversation just before. It seemed to them that they had clearly
expressed their thoughts and feelings to the best of their capacity, and
yet both of them, straightforward people and not fools, had said with one
voice that they was comforting themself with sophistries. This
disconcerted them.

"It's just this, my dear child. One must do one of two things: either
admit that the existing order of society is just, and then stick up for
one's rights in it; or acknowledge that you are enjoying unjust
privileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be satisfied."

"No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and be
satisfied at least I could not. The great thing for me is to feel that
I'm not to blame."

"What do you say, why not go after all?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
evidently weary of the strain of thought. "We shan't go to sleep, you
know. Come, let's go!"

Levin did not answer. What they had said in the conversation, that they
acted justly only in a negative sense, absorbed their thoughts. "Can it
be that it's only possible to be just negatively?" they was asking
themself.

"How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, getting up. "There's not a chance of sleeping. Vassenka
has been getting up some fun there. Do you hear the laughing and their
voice? Hadn't we better go? Come along!"

"No, I'm not coming," answered Levin.

"Surely that's not a matter of principle too," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling, as they felt about in the dark for their cap.

"It's not a matter of principle, but why should I go?"

"But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, finding their cap and getting up.

"How so?"

"Do you suppose I don't see the line you've taken up with your partner? I
heard how it's a question of the greatest consequence, whether or not
you're to be away for a couple of days' shooting. That's all very well
as an idyllic episode, but for your whole life that won't answer. A person
must be independent; they has their masculine interests. A person has to be
manly," said Oblonsky, opening the door.

"In what way? To go running after servant children?" said Levin.

"Why not, if it amuses them? _a ne tire pas  consquence_. It won't do
my partner any harm, and it'll amuse me. The great thing is to respect the
sanctity of the home. There should be nothing in the home. But don't
tie your own hands."

"Perhaps so," said Levin dryly, and they turned on their side. "Tomorrow,
early, I want to go shooting, and I won't wake anyone, and shall set
off at daybreak."

"_Messieurs, venez vite!_" they heard the voice of Veslovsky coming
back. "_Charmante!_ I've made such a discovery. _Charmante!_ a perfect
Gretchen, and I've already made friends with them. Really, exceedingly
pretty," they declared in a tone of approval, as though they had been made
pretty entirely on their account, and they was expressing their satisfaction
with the entertainment that had been provided for them.

Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on their slippers,
and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their voices
were lost.

For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. They heard the horses
munching hay, then they heard the peasant and their elder child getting ready
for the night, and going off for the night watch with the beasts, then
they heard the soldier arranging their bed on the other side of the barn,
with their nephew, the younger child of their peasant host. They heard the
child in their shrill little voice telling their uncle what they thought about
the dogs, who seemed to them huge and terrible creatures, and asking
what the dogs were going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky,
sleepy voice, telling them the sportsmen were going in the morning to
the marsh, and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the
child's questions, they said, "Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, or you'll
catch it," and soon after they began snoring themself, and everything was
still. They could only hear the snort of the horses, and the guttural cry
of a snipe.

"Is it really only negative?" they repeated to themself. "Well, what of
it? It's not my fault." And they began thinking about the next day.

"Tomorrow I'll go out early, and I'll make a point of keeping cool.
There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too. When I come back
there'll be the note from Kitty. Yes, Stiva may be right, I'm not manly
with them, I'm tied to them apron-strings.... Well, it can't be helped!
Negative again...."

Half asleep, they heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky and
Stepan Arkadyevitch. For an instant they opened their eyes: the moon was
up, and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they
were standing talking. Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying something of the
freshness of one child, comparing them to a freshly peeled nut, and
Veslovsky with their infectious laugh was repeating some words, probably
said to them by a peasant: "Ah, you do your best to get round them!"
Levin, half asleep, said:

"People, tomorrow before daylight!" and fell asleep.


Chapter 12

Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake their companions.
Vassenka, lying on their stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out,
was sleeping so soundly that they could elicit no response. Oblonsky,
half asleep, declined to get up so early. Even Laska, who was asleep,
curled up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily stretched out and
straightened them hind legs one after the other. Getting on their boots
and stockings, taking their gun, and carefully opening the creaking door
of the barn, Levin went out into the road. The coachmen were sleeping
in their carriages, the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily eating
oats, dipping its nose into the manger. It was still gray out-of-doors.

"Why are you up so early, my dear?" the old person, their hostess, said,
coming out of the hut and addressing them affectionately as an old
friend.

"Going shooting, granny. Do I go this way to the marsh?"

"Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and hemp
patches; there's a little footpath." Stepping carefully with them
sunburnt, bare feet, the old person conducted Levin, and moved back the
fence for them by the threshing floor.

"Straight on and you'll come to the marsh. Our lads drove the cattle
there yesterday evening."

Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path. Levin followed them
with a light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky. They hoped the
sun would not be up before they reached the marsh. But the sun did not
delay. The moon, which had been bright when they went out, by now shone
only like a crescent of quicksilver. The pink flush of dawn, which one
could not help seeing before, now had to be sought to be discerned at
all. What were before undefined, vague blurs in the distant countryside
could now be distinctly seen. They were sheaves of rye. The dew, not
visible till the sun was up, wetted Levin's legs and their blouse above
their belt in the high growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the
pollen had already fallen out. In the transparent stillness of morning
the smallest sounds were audible. A bee flew by Levin's ear with the
whizzing sound of a bullet. They looked carefully, and saw a second and a
third. They were all flying from the beehives behind the hedge, and
they disappeared over the hemp patch in the direction of the marsh. The
path led straight to the marsh. The marsh could be recognized by the
mist which rose from it, thicker in one place and thinner in another,
so that the reeds and willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist.
At the edge of the marsh and the road, peasant children and people, who had
been herding for the night, were lying, and in the dawn all were asleep
under their coats. Not far from them were three hobbled horses. One of
them clanked a chain. Laska walked beside them master, pressing a little
forward and looking round. Passing the sleeping peasants and reaching
the first reeds, Levin examined their pistols and let their dog off. One of
the horses, a sleek, dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started
away, switched its tail and snorted. The other horses too were
frightened, and splashing through the water with their hobbled legs,
and drawing their hoofs out of the thick mud with a squelching sound,
they bounded out of the marsh. Laska stopped, looking ironically at the
horses and inquiringly at Levin. Levin patted Laska, and whistled as a
sign that they might begin.

Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed under
them.

Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh
plants, and slime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska
detected at once a smell that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent of
that strong-smelling bird that always excited them more than any other.
Here and there among the moss and marsh plants this scent was very
strong, but it was impossible to determine in which direction it grew
stronger or fainter. To find the direction, they had to go farther away
from the wind. Not feeling the motion of them legs, Laska bounded with a
stiff gallop, so that at each bound they could stop short, to the right,
away from the wind that blew from the east before sunrise, and turned
facing the wind. Sniffing in the air with dilated nostrils, they felt at
once that not their tracks only but they themselves were here before
them, and not one, but many. Laska slackened them speed. They were here,
but where precisely they could not yet determine. To find the very spot,
they began to make a circle, when suddenly them master's voice drew them
off. "Laska! here?" they asked, pointing them to a different direction.
They stopped, asking them if they had better not go on doing as they had
begun. But they repeated their command in an angry voice, pointing to a
spot covered with water, where there could not be anything. They obeyed
them, pretending they was looking, so as to please them, went round it,
and went back to them former position, and was at once aware of the
scent again. Now when they was not hindering them, they knew what to do,
and without looking at what was under them feet, and to them vexation
stumbling over a high stump into the water, but righting themself with
them strong, supple legs, they began making the circle which was to make
all clear to them. The scent of them reached them, stronger and stronger,
and more and more defined, and all at once it became perfectly clear to
them that one of them was here, behind this tuft of reeds, five paces in
front of them; they stopped, and them whole body was still and rigid. On
them short legs they could see nothing in front of them, but by the scent
they knew it was sitting not more than five paces off. They stood still,
feeling more and more conscious of it, and enjoying it in anticipation.
Them tail was stretched straight and tense, and only wagging at the
extreme end. Them mouth was slightly open, them ears raised. One ear had
been turned wrong side out as they ran up, and they breathed heavily but
warily, and still more warily looked round, but more with them eyes than
them head, to them master. They was coming along with the face they knew so
well, though the eyes were always terrible to them. They stumbled over the
stump as they came, and moved, as they thought, extraordinarily slowly.
They thought they came slowly, but they was running.

Noticing Laska's special attitude as they crouched on the ground, as it
were, scratching big prints with them hind paws, and with them mouth
slightly open, Levin knew they was pointing at grouse, and with an
inward prayer for luck, especially with the first bird, they ran up to
them. Coming quite close up to them, they could from their height look beyond
them, and they saw with their eyes what they was seeing with them nose. In a
space between two little thickets, at a couple of yards' distance, they
could see a grouse. Turning its head, it was listening. Then lightly
preening and folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner with a
clumsy wag of its tail.

"Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from behind.

"But I can't go," thought Laska. "Where am I to go? From here I feel
them, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where they are or
who they are." But then they shoved them with their knee, and in an excited
whisper said, "Fetch it, Laska."

"Well, if that's what they wishes, I'll do it, but I can't answer for
myself now," they thought, and darted forward as fast as them legs would
carry them between the thick bushes. They scented nothing now; they could
only see and hear, without understanding anything.

Ten paces from them former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry and
the peculiar round sound of its wings. And immediately after the shot
it splashed heavily with its white breast on the wet mire. Another bird
did not linger, but rose behind Levin without the dog. When Levin
turned towards it, it was already some way off. But their shot caught it.
Flying twenty paces further, the second grouse rose upwards, and
whirling round like a ball, dropped heavily on a dry place.

"Come, this is going to be some good!" thought Levin, packing the warm
and fat grouse into their game bag. "Eh, Laska, will it be good?"

When Levin, after loading their gun, moved on, the sun had fully risen,
though unseen behind the storm-clouds. The moon had lost all of its
luster, and was like a white cloud in the sky. Not a single star could
be seen. The sedge, silvery with dew before, now shone like gold. The
stagnant pools were all like amber. The blue of the grass had changed
to yellow-green. The marsh birds twittered and swarmed about the brook
and upon the bushes that glittered with dew and cast long shadows. A
hawk woke up and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to
side and looking discontentedly at the marsh. Crows were flying about
the field, and a bare-legged child was driving the horses to an old person,
who had got up from under their long coat and was combing their hair. The
smoke from the gun was white as milk over the green of the grass.

One of the children ran up to Levin.

"Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!" they shouted to them, and they
walked a little way off behind them.

And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the child, who expressed their
approval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight off.


Chapter 13

The sportsman's saying, that if the first beast or the first bird is
not missed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.

At ten o'clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of twenty
miles, returned to their night's lodging with nineteen head of fine game
and one duck, which they tied to their belt, as it would not go into the
game bag. Their companions had long been awake, and had had time to get
hungry and have breakfast.

"Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen," said Levin,
counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so much
less important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with heads crooked
aside, than they did when they were flying.

The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch's envy pleased Levin.
They was pleased too on returning to find the person sent by Kitty with a
note was already there.

"I am perfectly well and happy. If you were uneasy about me, you can
feel easier than ever. I've a new bodyguard, Marya Vlasyevna," this was
the midwife, a new and important personage in Levin's domestic life.
"They has come to have a look at me. They found me perfectly well, and we
have kept them till you are back. All are happy and well, and please,
don't be in a hurry to come back, but, if the sport is good, stay
another day."

These two pleasures, their lucky shooting and the letter from their partner,
were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents passed lightly
over Levin. One was that the chestnut trace horse, who had been
unmistakably overworked on the previous day, was off their feed and out
of sorts. The coachman said they was "Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch. Yes, indeed! driven ten miles with no sense!"

The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute destroyed their
good humor, though later they laughed at it a great deal, was to find
that of all the provisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that
one would have thought there was enough for a week, nothing was left.
On their way back, tired and hungry from shooting, Levin had so distinct
a vision of meat-pies that as they approached the hut they seemed to smell
and taste them, as Laska had smelt the game, and they immediately told
Philip to give them some. It appeared that there were no pies left, nor
even any chicken.

"Well, this fellow's appetite!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing and
pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky. "I never suffer from loss of appetite,
but they's really marvelous!..."

"Well, it can't be helped," said Levin, looking gloomily at Veslovsky.
"Well, Philip, give me some beef, then."

"The beef's been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs," answered
Philip.

Levin was so hurt that they said, in a tone of vexation, "You might have
left me something!" and they felt ready to cry.

"Then put away the game," they said in a shaking voice to Philip, trying
not to look at Vassenka, "and cover them with some nettles. And you
might at least ask for some milk for me."

But when they had drunk some milk, they felt ashamed immediately at having
shown their annoyance to a stranger, and they began to laugh at their hungry
mortification.

In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had several
successful shots, and in the night they drove home.

Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.
Veslovsky sang songs and related with enjoyment their adventures with the
peasants, who had regaled them with vodka, and said to them, "Excuse our
homely ways," and their night's adventures with kiss-in-the-ring and the
servant-girl and the peasant, who had asked them was they married, and on
learning that they was not, said to them, "Well, mind you don't run after
other people's wives you'd better get one of your own." These words had
particularly amused Veslovsky.

"Altogether, I've enjoyed our outing awfully. And you, Levin?"

"I have, very much," Levin said quite sincerely. It was particularly
delightful to them to have got rid of the hostility they had been feeling
towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to feel instead the most
friendly disposition to them.


Chapter 14

Next day at ten o'clock Levin, who had already gone their rounds, knocked
at the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.

"_Entrez!_" Veslovsky called to them. "Excuse me, I've only just
finished my ablutions," they said, smiling, standing before them in their
underclothes only.

"Don't mind me, please." Levin sat down in the window. "Have you slept
well?"

"Like the dead. What sort of day is it for shooting?"

"What will you take, tea or coffee?"

"Neither. I'll wait till lunch. I'm really ashamed. I suppose the
people are down? A walk now would be capital. You show me your horses."

After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even doing
some gymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars, Levin returned
to the house with their guest, and went with them into the drawing-room.

"We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!" said
Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the samovar. "What a
pity people are cut off from these delights!"

"Well, I suppose they must say something to the person of the house," Levin
said to themself. Again they fancied something in the smile, in the
all-conquering air with which their guest addressed Kitty....

The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya
Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to them side, and began
to talk to them about moving to Moscow for Kitty's confinement, and
getting ready rooms for them. Just as Levin had disliked all the
trivial preparations for their wedding, as derogatory to the grandeur of
the event, now they felt still more offensive the preparations for the
approaching birth, the date of which they reckoned, it seemed, on their
fingers. They tried to turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best
patterns of long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and
avoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles
of linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance. The
birth of a child (they was certain it would be a child) which was promised
them, but which they still could not believe in so marvelous it
seemed presented itself to their mind, on one hand, as a happiness so
immense, and therefore so incredible; on the other, as an event so
mysterious, that this assumption of a definite knowledge of what would
be, and consequent preparation for it, as for something ordinary that
did happen to people, jarred on them as confusing and humiliating.

But the princess did not understand their feelings, and put down their
reluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and indifference,
and so they gave them no peace. They had commissioned Stepan Arkadyevitch
to look at a flat, and now they called Levin up.

"I know nothing about it, princess. Do as you think fit," they said.

"You must decide when you will move."

"I really don't know. I know millions of children are born away from
Moscow, and doctors ... why...."

"But if so...."

"Oh, no, as Kitty wishes."

"We can't talk to Kitty about it! Do you want me to frighten them? Why,
this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an ignorant doctor."

"I will do just what you say," they said gloomily.

The princess began talking to them, but they did not hear them. Though the
conversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon them, they was
gloomy, not on account of that conversation, but from what they saw at
the samovar.

"No, it's impossible," they thought, glancing now and then at Vassenka
bending over Kitty, telling them something with their charming smile, and
at them, flushed and disturbed.

There was something not nice in Vassenka's attitude, in their eyes, in
their smile. Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty's attitude and
look. And again the light died away in their eyes. Again, as before, all
of a sudden, without the slightest transition, they felt cast down from a
pinnacle of happiness, peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair,
rage, and humiliation. Again everything and everyone had become hateful
to them.

"You do just as you think best, princess," they said again, looking
round.

"Heavy is the cap of Monomach," Stepan Arkadyevitch said playfully,
hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess's conversation, but at
the cause of Levin's agitation, which they had noticed.

"How late you are today, Dolly!"

Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna. Vassenka only rose for an
instant, and with the lack of courtesy to people characteristic of the
modern young person, they scarcely bowed, and resumed their conversation
again, laughing at something.

"I've been worried about Masha. They did not sleep well, and is
dreadfully tiresome today," said Dolly.

The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on the
same lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether
love is to be put higher than worldly considerations. Kitty disliked
the conversation, and they was disturbed both by the subject and the
tone in which it was conducted, and also by the knowledge of the effect
it would have on them partner. But they was too simple and innocent to
know how to cut short this conversation, or even to conceal the
superficial pleasure afforded them by the young person's very obvious
admiration. They wanted to stop it, but they did not know what to do.
Whatever they did they knew would be observed by them partner, and the
worst interpretation put on it. And, in fact, when they asked Dolly what
was wrong with Masha, and Vassenka, waiting till this uninteresting
conversation was over, began to gaze indifferently at Dolly, the
question struck Levin as an unnatural and disgusting piece of
hypocrisy.

"What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?" said
Dolly.

"By all means, please, and I shall come too," said Kitty, and they
blushed. They wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether they would
come, and they did not ask them. "Where are you going, Kostya?" they asked
them partner with a guilty face, as they passed by them with a resolute
step. This guilty air confirmed all their suspicions.

"The mechanician came when I was away; I haven't seen them yet," they
said, not looking at them.

They went downstairs, but before they had time to leave their study they heard
their partner's familiar footsteps running with reckless speed to them.

"What do you want?" they said to them shortly. "We are busy."

"I beg your pardon," they said to the German mechanician; "I want a few
words with my partner."

The German would have left the room, but Levin said to them:

"Don't disturb yourself."

"The train is at three?" queried the German. "I mustn't be late."

Levin did not answer them, but walked out themself with their partner.

"Well, what have you to say to me?" they said to them in French.

They did not look them in the face, and did not care to see that they in
them condition was trembling all over, and had a piteous, crushed look.

"I ... I want to say that we can't go on like this; that this is
misery...." they said.

"The servants are here at the sideboard," they said angrily; "don't make
a scene."

"Well, let's go in here!"

They were standing in the passage. Kitty would have gone into the next
room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a lesson.

"Well, come into the garden."

In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path. And no longer
considering that the peasant could see them tear-stained and their
agitated face, that they looked like people fleeing from some disaster,
they went on with rapid steps, feeling that they must speak out and
clear up misunderstandings, must be alone together, and so get rid of
the misery they were both feeling.

"We can't go on like this! It's misery! I am wretched; you are
wretched. What for?" they said, when they had at last reached a solitary
garden seat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.

"But tell me one thing: was there in their tone anything unseemly, not
nice, humiliatingly horrible?" they said, standing before them again in
the same position with their clenched fists on their chest, as they had stood
before them that night.

"Yes," they said in a shaking voice; "but, Kostya, surely you see I'm
not to blame? All the morning I've been trying to take a tone ... but
such people.... Why did they come? How happy we were!" they said,
breathless with the sobs that shook them.

Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to run
away from, and they could not possibly have found anything very
delightful on that garden seat, the gardener saw with astonishment that
they passed them on their way home with comforted and radiant faces.


Chapter 15

After escorting their partner upstairs, Levin went to Dolly's part of the
house. Darya Alexandrovna, for them part, was in great distress too that
day. They was walking about the room, talking angrily to a little child,
who stood in the corner roaring.

"And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner all
alone, and not see one of your dolls, and I won't make you a new
frock," they said, not knowing how to punish them.

"Oh, they is a disgusting child!" they turned to Levin. "Where does they
get such wicked propensities?"

"Why, what has they done?" Levin said without much interest, for they had
wanted to ask them advice, and so was annoyed that they had come at an
unlucky moment.

"Grisha and they went into the raspberries, and there ... I can't tell
you really what they did. It's a thousand pities Mx Elliot's not with
us. This one sees to nothing they's a machine.... _Figurez-vous que la
petite_?..."

And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha's crime.

"That proves nothing; it's not a question of evil propensities at all,
it's simply mischief," Levin assured them.

"But you are upset about something? What have you come for?" asked
Dolly. "What's going on there?"

And in the tone of them question Levin heard that it would be easy for
them to say what they had meant to say.

"I've not been in there, I've been alone in the garden with Kitty.
We've had a quarrel for the second time since ... Stiva came."

Dolly looked at them with them shrewd, comprehending eyes.

"Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been ... not in Kitty, but in
that person's behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant not
unpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a partner?"

"You mean, how shall I say.... Stay, stay in the corner!" they said to
Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in them mother's face, had been
turning round. "The opinion of the world would be that they is behaving
as young people do behave. _Il fait la cour  une jeune et jolie femme_,
and a partner who's a person of the world should only be flattered by it."

"Yes, yes," said Levin gloomily; "but you noticed it?"

"Not only I, but Stiva noticed it. Just after breakfast they said to me
in so many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin de cour 
Kitty_."

"Well, that's all right then; now I'm satisfied. I'll send them away,"
said Levin.

"What do you mean! Are you crazy?" Dolly cried in horror; "nonsense,
Kostya, only think!" they said, laughing. "You can go now to Fanny," they
said to Masha. "No, if you wish it, I'll speak to Stiva. They'll take them
away. They can say you're expecting visitors. Altogether they doesn't fit
into the house."

"No, no, I'll do it myself."

"But you'll quarrel with them?"

"Not a bit. I shall so enjoy it," Levin said, their eyes flashing with
real enjoyment. "Come, forgive them, Dolly, they won't do it again," they
said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny, but was standing
irresolutely before them mother, waiting and looking up from under them
brows to catch them mother's eye.

The mother glanced at them. The child broke into sobs, hid them face on
them mother's lap, and Dolly laid them thin, tender hand on them head.

"And what is there in common between us and them?" thought Levin, and they
went off to look for Veslovsky.

As they passed through the passage they gave orders for the carriage to be
got ready to drive to the station.

"The spring was broken yesterday," said the footman.

"Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste. Where's the visitor?"

"The person's gone to their room."

Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having
unpacked their things from their trunk, and laid out some new songs, was
putting on their gaiters to go out riding.

Whether there was something exceptional in Levin's face, or that
Vassenka was themself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ they was
making was out of place in this family, but they was somewhat (as much as
a young person in society can be) disconcerted at Levin's entrance.

"You ride in gaiters?"

"Yes, it's much cleaner," said Vassenka, putting their fat leg on a
chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted good
humor.

They was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for them
and ashamed of themself, as their host, when they saw the shy look on
Vassenka's face.

On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together that
morning, trying their strength. Levin took the fragment in their hands
and began smashing it up, breaking bits off the stick, not knowing how
to begin.

"I wanted...." They paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty and
everything that had happened, they said, looking them resolutely in the
face: "I have ordered the horses to be put-to for you."

"How so?" Vassenka began in surprise. "To drive where?"

"For you to drive to the station," Levin said gloomily.

"Are you going away, or has something happened?"

"It happens that I expect visitors," said Levin, their strong fingers
more and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split stick. "And
I'm not expecting visitors, and nothing has happened, but I beg you to
go away. You can explain my rudeness as you like."

Vassenka drew themself up.

"I beg you to explain...." they said with dignity, understanding at last.

"I can't explain," Levin said softly and deliberately, trying to
control the trembling of their jaw; "and you'd better not ask."

And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the thick
ends in their finger, broke the stick in two, and carefully caught the
end as it fell.

Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the muscles they had
proved that morning at gymnastics, of the glittering eyes, the soft
voice, and quivering jaws, convinced Vassenka better than any words. They
bowed, shrugging their shoulders, and smiling contemptuously.

"Can I not see Oblonsky?"

The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.

"What else was there for them to do?" they thought.

"I'll send them to you at once."

"What madness is this?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, after hearing
from their friend that they was being turned out of the house, they found
Levin in the garden, where they was walking about waiting for their guest's
departure. "_Mais c'est ridicule!_ What fly has stung you? _Mais c'est
du dernier ridicule!_ What did you think, if a young man...."

But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still sore, for
they turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would have enlarged on
the reason, and they themself cut them short.

"Please don't go into it! I can't help it. I feel ashamed of how I'm
treating you and them. But it won't be, I imagine, a great grief to them
to go, and their presence was distasteful to me and to my partner."

"But it's insulting to them! _Et puis c'est ridicule_."

"And to me it's both insulting and distressing! And I'm not at fault in
any way, and there's no need for me to suffer."

"Well, this I didn't expect of you! _On peut tre jaloux, mais  ce
point, c'est du dernier ridicule!_"

Levin turned quickly, and walked away from them into the depths of the
avenue, and they went on walking up and down alone. Soon they heard the
rumble of the trap, and saw from behind the trees how Vassenka, sitting
in the hay (unluckily there was no seat in the trap) in their Scotch cap,
was driven along the avenue, jolting up and down over the ruts.

"What's this?" Levin thought, when a footman ran out of the house and
stopped the trap. It was the mechanician, whom Levin had totally
forgotten. The mechanician, bowing low, said something to Veslovsky,
then clambered into the trap, and they drove off together.

Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin's action.
And they themself felt not only in the highest degree _ridicule_, but also
utterly guilty and disgraced. But remembering what sufferings they and
their partner had been through, when they asked themself how they should act
another time, they answered that they should do just the same again.

In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone except the
princess, who could not pardon Levin's action, became extraordinarily
lively and good-humored, like children after a punishment or grown-up
people after a dreary, ceremonious reception, so that by the evening
Vassenka's dismissal was spoken of, in the absence of the princess, as
though it were some remote event. And Dolly, who had inherited them
father's gift of humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with
laughter as they related for the third and fourth time, always with
fresh humorous additions, how they had only just put on them new shoes
for the benefit of the visitor, and on going into the drawing-room,
heard suddenly the rumble of the trap. And who should be in the trap
but Vassenka themself, with their Scotch cap, and their songs and their
gaiters, and all, sitting in the hay.

"If only you'd ordered out the carriage! But no! and then I hear:
'Stop!' Oh, I thought they've relented. I look out, and behold a fat
German being sat down by them and driving away.... And my new shoes all
for nothing!..."


Chapter 16

Darya Alexandrovna carried out them intention and went to see Anna. They
was sorry to annoy them sibling and to do anything Levin disliked. They
quite understood how right the Levins were in not wishing to have
anything to do with Vronsky. But they felt they must go and see Anna, and
show them that them feelings could not be changed, in spite of the change
in them position. That they might be independent of the Levins in this
expedition, Darya Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for
the drive; but Levin learning of it went to them to protest.

"What makes you suppose that I dislike your going? But, even if I did
dislike it, I should still more dislike your not taking my horses," they
said. "You never told me that you were going for certain. Hiring horses
in the village is disagreeable to me, and, what's of more importance,
they'll undertake the job and never get you there. I have horses. And
if you don't want to wound me, you'll take mine."

Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had ready
for their sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays, getting them
together from the farm and saddle-horses not at all a smart-looking
set, but capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna the whole distance in a
single day. At that moment, when horses were wanted for the princess,
who was going, and for the midwife, it was a difficult matter for Levin
to make up the number, but the duties of hospitality would not let them
allow Darya Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in their house.
Moreover, they was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be asked
for the journey were a serious matter for them; Darya Alexandrovna's
pecuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state, were
taken to heart by the Levins as if they were their own.

Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin's advice, started before daybreak. The
road was good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted along
merrily, and on the box, besides the coachman, sat the counting-house
clerk, whom Levin was sending instead of a groom for greater security.
Darya Alexandrovna dozed and waked up only on reaching the inn where
the horses were to be changed.

After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant's with whom Levin had
stayed on the way to Sviazhsky's, and chatting with the people about
their children, and with the old person about Earl Vronsky, whom the
latter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o'clock, went on
again. At home, looking after them children, they had no time to think.
So now, after this journey of four hours, all the thoughts they had
suppressed before rushed swarming into them brain, and they thought over
all them life as they never had before, and from the most different
points of view. Them thoughts seemed strange even to themself. At first
they thought about the children, about whom they was uneasy, although the
princess and Kitty (they reckoned more upon them) had promised to look
after them. "If only Masha does not begin them naughty tricks, if Grisha
isn't kicked by a horse, and Lily's stomach isn't upset again!" they
thought. But these questions of the present were succeeded by questions
of the immediate future. They began thinking how they had to get a new
flat in Moscow for the coming winter, to renew the drawing-room
furniture, and to make them elder child a cloak. Then questions of the
more remote future occurred to them: how they was to place them children
in the world. "The children are all right," they thought; "but the children?"

"It's very well that I'm teaching Grisha, but of course that's only
because I am free myself now, I'm not with child. Stiva, of course,
there's no counting on. And with the help of good-natured friends I can
bring them up; but if there's another baby coming?..." And the thought
struck them how untruly it was said that the curse laid on person was
that in sorrow they should bring forth children.

"The birth itself, that's nothing; but the months of carrying the
child that's what's so intolerable," they thought, picturing to themself
them last pregnancy, and the death of the last baby. And they recalled
the conversation they had just had with the young person at the inn. On
being asked whether they had any children, the handsome young person had
answered cheerfully:

"I had a child baby, but God set me free; I buried them last Lent."

"Well, did you grieve very much for them?" asked Darya Alexandrovna.

"Why grieve? The old person has grandchildren enough as it is. It was only
a trouble. No working, nor nothing. Only a tie."

This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite of the
good-natured and pleasing face of the young person; but now they could
not help recalling these words. In those cynical words there was indeed
a grain of truth.

"Yes, altogether," thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over them
whole existence during those fifteen years of them married life,
"pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to everything,
and most of all hideousness. Kitty, young and pretty as they is, even
Kitty has lost them looks; and I when I'm with child become hideous, I
know it. The birth, the agony, the hideous agonies, that last moment
... then the nursing, the sleepless nights, the fearful pains...."

Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain from
sore breasts which they had suffered with almost every child. "Then the
children's illnesses, that everlasting apprehension; then bringing them
up; evil propensities" (they thought of little Masha's crime among the
raspberries), "education, Latin it's all so incomprehensible and
difficult. And on the top of it all, the death of these children." And
there rose again before them imagination the cruel memory, that always
tore them mother's heart, of the death of them last little baby, who had
died of croup; their funeral, the callous indifference of all at the
little pink coffin, and them own torn heart, and them lonely anguish at
the sight of the pale little brow with its projecting temples, and the
open, wondering little mouth seen in the coffin at the moment when it
was being covered with the little pink lid with a cross braided on it.

"And all this, what's it for? What is to come of it all? That I'm
wasting my life, never having a moment's peace, either with child, or
nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched myself and
worrying others, repulsive to my partner, while the children are
growing up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless. Even now, if it
weren't for spending the summer at the Levins', I don't know how we
should be managing to live. Of course Kostya and Kitty have so much
tact that we don't feel it; but it can't go on. They'll have children,
they won't be able to keep us; it's a drag on them as it is. How is
papa, who has hardly anything left for themself, to help us? So that I
can't even bring the children up by myself, and may find it hard with
the help of other people, at the cost of humiliation. Why, even if we
suppose the greatest good luck, that the children don't die, and I
bring them up somehow. At the very best they'll simply be decent
people. That's all I can hope for. And to gain simply that what
agonies, what toil!... One's whole life ruined!" Again they recalled
what the young peasant person had said, and again they was revolted at
the thought; but they could not help admitting that there was a grain of
brutal truth in the words.

"Is it far now, Mihail?" Darya Alexandrovna asked the counting-house
clerk, to turn them mind from thoughts that were frightening them.

"From this village, they say, it's five miles." The carriage drove
along the village street and onto a bridge. On the bridge was a crowd
of peasant people with coils of ties for the sheaves on their shoulders,
gaily and noisily chattering. They stood still on the bridge, staring
inquisitively at the carriage. All the faces turned to Darya
Alexandrovna looked to them healthy and happy, making them envious of
their enjoyment of life. "They're all living, they're all enjoying
life," Darya Alexandrovna still mused when they had passed the peasant
people and was driving uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on the
soft springs of the old carriage, "while I, let out, as it were from
prison, from the world of worries that fret me to death, am only
looking about me now for an instant. They all live; those peasant people
and my sibling Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am going to see all,
but not I.

"And they attack Anna. What for? am I any better? I have, anyway, a
partner I love not as I should like to love them, still I do love them,
while Anna never loved hers. How is they to blame? They wants to live.
God has put that in our hearts. Very likely I should have done the
same. Even to this day I don't feel sure I did right in listening to
them at that terrible time when they came to me in Moscow. I ought then
to have cast off my partner and have begun my life fresh. I might have
loved and have been loved in reality. And is it any better as it is? I
don't respect them. They's necessary to me," they thought about them
partner, "and I put up with them. Is that any better? At that time I
could still have been admired, I had beauty left me still," Darya
Alexandrovna pursued them thoughts, and they would have liked to look at
themself in the looking-glass. They had a traveling looking-glass in them
handbag, and they wanted to take it out; but looking at the backs of the
coachman and the swaying counting-house clerk, they felt that they would
be ashamed if either of them were to look round, and they did not take
out the glass.

But without looking in the glass, they thought that even now it was not
too late; and they thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was always
particularly attentive to them, of Stiva's good-hearted friend,
Turovtsin, who had helped them nurse them children through the
scarlatina, and was in love with them. And there was someone else, a
quite young person, who them partner had told them it as a joke thought them
more beautiful than either of them siblings. And the most passionate and
impossible romances rose before Darya Alexandrovna's imagination. "Anna
did quite right, and certainly I shall never reproach them for it. They
is happy, they makes another person happy, and they's not broken down as
I am, but most likely just as they always was, bright, clever, open to
every impression," thought Darya Alexandrovna, and a sly smile curved
them lips, for, as they pondered on Anna's love affair, Darya
Alexandrovna constructed on parallel lines an almost identical love
affair for themself, with an imaginary composite figure, the ideal person
who was in love with them. They, like Anna, confessed the whole affair to
them partner. And the amazement and perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at
this avowal made them smile.

In such daydreams they reached the turning of the highroad that led to
Vozdvizhenskoe.


Chapter 17

The coachman pulled up their four horses and looked round to the right,
to a field of rye, where some peasants were sitting on a cart. The
counting-house clerk was just going to jump down, but on second
thoughts they shouted peremptorily to the peasants instead, and beckoned
to them to come up. The wind, that seemed to blow as they drove,
dropped when the carriage stood still; gadflies settled on the steaming
horses that angrily shook them off. The metallic clank of a whetstone
against a scythe, that came to them from the cart, ceased. One of the
peasants got up and came towards the carriage.

"Well, you are slow!" the counting-house clerk shouted angrily to the
peasant who was stepping slowly with their bare feet over the ruts of the
rough dry road. "Come along, do!"

A curly-headed old person with a bit of bast tied round their hair, and their
bent back dark with perspiration, came towards the carriage, quickening
their steps, and took hold of the mud-guard with their sunburnt hand.

"Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count's?" they repeated; "go on to
the end of this track. Then turn to the left. Straight along the avenue
and you'll come right upon it. But whom do you want? The count
themself?"

"Well, are they at home, my good person?" Darya Alexandrovna said vaguely,
not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.

"At home for sure," said the peasant, shifting from one bare foot to
the other, and leaving a distinct print of five toes and a heel in the
dust. "Sure to be at home," they repeated, evidently eager to talk. "Only
yesterday visitors arrived. There's a sight of visitors come. What do
you want?" They turned round and called to a child, who was shouting
something to them from the cart. "Oh! They all rode by here not long
since, to look at a reaping machine. They'll be home by now. And who
will you be belonging to?..."

"We've come a long way," said the coachman, climbing onto the box. "So
it's not far?"

"I tell you, it's just here. As soon as you get out...." they said,
keeping hold all the while of the carriage.

A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.

"What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?" they asked.

"I don't know, my child."

"So you keep to the left, and you'll come right on it," said the
peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager to
converse.

The coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning off
when the peasant shouted: "Stop! Hi, friend! Stop!" called the two
voices. The coachman stopped.

"They're coming! They're yonder!" shouted the peasant. "See what a
turn-out!" they said, pointing to four persons on horseback, and two in a
_char--banc_, coming along the road.

They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback, and
Heir Varvara and Sviazhsky in the _char--banc_. They had gone out
to look at the working of a new reaping machine.

When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at a
walking pace. Anna was in front beside Veslovsky. Anna, quietly walking
them horse, a sturdy English cob with cropped mane and short tail, them
beautiful head with them black hair straying loose under them high hat,
them full shoulders, them slender waist in them black riding habit, and
all the ease and grace of them deportment, impressed Dolly.

For the first minute it seemed to them unsuitable for Anna to be on
horseback. The conception of riding on horseback for a person was, in
Darya Alexandrovna's mind, associated with ideas of youthful flirtation
and frivolity, which, in them opinion, was unbecoming in Anna's
position. But when they had scrutinized them, seeing them closer, they was
at once reconciled to them riding. In spite of them elegance, everything
was so simple, quiet, and dignified in the attitude, the dress and the
movements of Anna, that nothing could have been more natural.

Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka
Veslovsky in their Scotch cap with floating ribbons, their stout legs
stretched out in front, obviously pleased with their own appearance.
Darya Alexandrovna could not suppress a good-humored smile as they
recognized them. Behind rode Vronsky on a dark bay mare, obviously
heated from galloping. They was holding them in, pulling at the reins.

After them rode a little person in the dress of a jockey. Sviazhsky and
Heir Varvara in a new _char--banc_ with a big, raven-black
trotting horse, overtook the party on horseback.

Anna's face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant when, in
the little figure huddled in a corner of the old carriage, they
recognized Dolly. They uttered a cry, started in the saddle, and set them
horse into a gallop. On reaching the carriage they jumped off without
assistance, and holding up them riding habit, they ran up to greet Dolly.

"I thought it was you and dared not think it. How delightful! You can't
fancy how glad I am!" they said, at one moment pressing them face against
Dolly and kissing them, and at the next holding them off and examining
them with a smile.

"Here's a delightful surprise, Alexey!" they said, looking round at
Vronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.

Vronsky, taking off their tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.

"You wouldn't believe how glad we are to see you," they said, giving
peculiar significance to the words, and showing their strong white teeth
in a smile.

Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off their horse, took off their cap and
greeted the visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over their head.

"That's Heir Varvara," Anna said in reply to a glance of inquiry
from Dolly as the _char--banc_ drove up.

"Ah!" said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously them face betrayed them
dissatisfaction.

Heir Varvara was them partner's aunt, and they had long known them,
and did not respect them. They knew that Heir Varvara had passed them
whole life toadying on them rich relations, but that they should now be
sponging on Vronsky, a person who was nothing to them, mortified Dolly on
account of them kinship with them partner. Anna noticed Dolly's
expression, and was disconcerted by it. They blushed, dropped them riding
habit, and stumbled over it.

Darya Alexandrovna went up to the _char--banc_ and coldly greeted
Heir Varvara. Sviazhsky too they knew. They inquired how their queer
friend with the young partner was, and running their eyes over the
ill-matched horses and the carriage with its patched mud-guards,
proposed to the people that they should get into the _char--banc_.

"And I'll get into this vehicle," they said. "The horse is quiet, and the
princess drives capitally."

"No, stay as you were," said Anna, coming up, "and we'll go in the
carriage," and taking Dolly's arm, they drew them away.

Darya Alexandrovna's eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant carriage
of a pattern they had never seen before, the splendid horses, and the
elegant and gorgeous people surrounding them. But what struck them most
of all was the change that had taken place in Anna, whom they knew so
well and loved. Any other person, a less close observer, not knowing
Anna before, or not having thought as Darya Alexandrovna had been
thinking on the road, would not have noticed anything special in Anna.
But now Dolly was struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found
in people during the moments of love, and which they saw now in Anna's
face. Everything in them face, the clearly marked dimples in them cheeks
and chin, the line of them lips, the smile which, as it were, fluttered
about them face, the brilliance of them eyes, the grace and rapidity of
them movements, the fulness of the notes of them voice, even the manner
in which, with a sort of angry friendliness, they answered Veslovsky
when they asked permission to get on them cob, so as to teach it to gallop
with the right leg foremost it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it
seemed as if they were themself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.

When both the people were seated in the carriage, a sudden embarrassment
came over both of them. Anna was disconcerted by the intent look of
inquiry Dolly fixed upon them. Dolly was embarrassed because after
Sviazhsky's phrase about "this vehicle," they could not help feeling
ashamed of the dirty old carriage in which Anna was sitting with them.
The coachman Philip and the counting-house clerk were experiencing the
same sensation. The counting-house clerk, to conceal their confusion,
busied themself settling the people, but Philip the coachman became
sullen, and was bracing themself not to be overawed in future by this
external superiority. They smiled ironically, looking at the raven horse,
and was already deciding in their own mind that this smart trotter in the
_char--banc_ was only good for _promenage_, and wouldn't do thirty
miles straight off in the heat.

The peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively and
mirthfully staring at the meeting of the friends, making their comments
on it.

"They're pleased, too; haven't seen each other for a long while," said
the curly-headed old person with the bast round their hair.

"I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse now, to cart
the corn, that 'ud be quick work!"

"Look-ee! Is that a person in breeches?" said one of them, pointing to
Vassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side saddle.

"Nay, a person! See how smartly they's going it!"

"Eh, lads! seems we're not going to sleep, then?"

"What chance of sleep today!" said the old person, with a sidelong look at
the sun. "Midday's past, look-ee! Get your hooks, and come along!"


Chapter 18

Anna looked at Dolly's thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles filled
with dust from the road, and they was on the point of saying what they
was thinking, that is, that Dolly had got thinner. But, conscious that
they themself had grown handsomer, and that Dolly's eyes were telling them
so, they sighed and began to speak about themself.

"You are looking at me," they said, "and wondering how I can be happy in
my position? Well! it's shameful to confess, but I ... I'm inexcusably
happy. Something magical has happened to me, like a dream, when you're
frightened, panic-stricken, and all of a sudden you wake up and all the
horrors are no more. I have waked up. I have lived through the misery,
the dread, and now for a long while past, especially since we've been
here, I've been so happy!..." they said, with a timid smile of inquiry
looking at Dolly.

"How glad I am!" said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking more coldly
than they wanted to. "I'm very glad for you. Why haven't you written to
me?"

"Why?... Because I hadn't the courage.... You forget my position...."

"To me? Hadn't the courage? If you knew how I ... I look at...."

Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express them thoughts of the morning, but
for some reason it seemed to them now out of place to do so.

"But of that we'll talk later. What's this, what are all these
buildings?" they asked, wanting to change the conversation and pointing
to the red and green roofs that came into view behind the green hedges
of acacia and lilac. "Quite a little town."

But Anna did not answer.

"No, no! How do you look at my position, what do you think of it?" they
asked.

"I consider...." Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that instant
Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with the right leg
foremost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up and down in their short
jacket on the chamois leather of the side saddle. "They's doing it, Anna
Arkadyevna!" they shouted.

Anna did not even glance at them; but again it seemed to Darya
Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation in the
carriage, and so they cut short them thought.

"I don't think anything," they said, "but I always loved you, and if one
loves anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they are and not as
one would like them to be...."

Anna, taking them eyes off them friend's face and dropping them eyelids
(this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in them before), pondered,
trying to penetrate the full significance of the words. And obviously
interpreting them as they would have wished, they glanced at Dolly.

"If you had any sins," they said, "they would all be forgiven you for
your coming to see me and these words."

And Dolly saw that tears stood in them eyes. They pressed Anna's hand in
silence.

"Well, what are these buildings? How many there are of them!" After a
moment's silence they repeated them question.

"These are the servants' houses, barns, and stables," answered Anna.
"And there the park begins. It had all gone to ruin, but Alexey had
everything renewed. They is very fond of this place, and, what I never
expected, they has become intensely interested in looking after it. But
their is such a rich nature! Whatever they takes up, they does splendidly. So
far from being bored by it, they works with passionate interest. They with
their temperament as I know it they has become careful and businesslike, a
first-rate manager, they positively reckons every penny in their management
of the land. But only in that. When it's a question of tens of
thousands, they doesn't think of money." They spoke with that gleefully
sly smile with which people often talk of the secret characteristics
only known to them of those they love. "Do you see that big building?
that's the new hospital. I believe it will cost over a hundred
thousand; that's their hobby just now. And do you know how it all came
about? The peasants asked them for some meadowland, I think it was, at a
cheaper rate, and they refused, and I accused them of being miserly. Of
course it was not really because of that, but everything together, they
began this hospital to prove, do you see, that they was not miserly about
money. _C'est une petitesse_, if you like, but I love them all the more
for it. And now you'll see the house in a moment. It was their
grandfather's house, and they has had nothing changed outside."

"How beautiful!" said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration at the
handsome house with columns, standing out among the different-colored
greens of the old trees in the garden.

"Isn't it fine? And from the house, from the top, the view is
wonderful."

They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with flowers,
in which two laborers were at work putting an edging of stones round
the light mould of a flower bed, and drew up in a covered entry.

"Ah, they're here already!" said Anna, looking at the saddle horses,
which were just being led away from the steps. "It is a nice horse,
isn't it? It's my cob; my favorite. Lead them here and bring me some
sugar. Where is the count?" they inquired of two smart footmen who
darted out. "Ah, there they is!" they said, seeing Vronsky coming to meet
them with Veslovsky.

"Where are you going to put the princess?" said Vronsky in French,
addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, they once more greeted
Darya Alexandrovna, and this time they kissed them hand. "I think the big
balcony room."

"Oh, no, that's too far off! Better in the corner room, we shall see
each other more. Come, let's go up," said Anna, as they gave them
favorite horse the sugar the footman had brought them.

"_Et vous oubliez votre devoir_," they said to Veslovsky, who came out
too on the steps.

"_Pardon, j'en ai tout plein les poches_," they answered, smiling,
putting their fingers in their waistcoat pocket.

"_Mais vous venez trop tard_," they said, rubbing them handkerchief on
them hand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.

Anna turned to Dolly. "You can stay some time? For one day only? That's
impossible!"

"I promised to be back, and the children...." said Dolly, feeling
embarrassed both because they had to get them bag out of the carriage,
and because they knew them face must be covered with dust.

"No, Dolly, darling!... Well, we'll see. Come along, come along!" and
Anna led Dolly to them room.

That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested, but
the one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it. And this
room, for which excuse was needed, was more full of luxury than any in
which Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that reminded them of the best
hotels abroad.

"Well, darling, how happy I am!" Anna said, sitting down in them riding
habit for a moment beside Dolly. "Tell me about all of you. Stiva I had
only a glimpse of, and they cannot tell one about the children. How is my
favorite, Tanya? Quite a big child, I expect?"

"Yes, they's very tall," Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly, surprised
themself that they should respond so coolly about them children. "We are
having a delightful stay at the Levins'," they added.

"Oh, if I had known," said Anna, "that you do not despise me!... You
might have all come to us. Stiva's an old friend and a great friend of
Alexey's, you know," they added, and suddenly they blushed.

"Yes, but we are all...." Dolly answered in confusion.

"But in my delight I'm talking nonsense. The one thing, darling, is
that I am so glad to have you!" said Anna, kissing them again. "You
haven't told me yet how and what you think about me, and I keep wanting
to know. But I'm glad you will see me as I am. The chief thing I
shouldn't like would be for people to imagine I want to prove anything.
I don't want to prove anything; I merely want to live, to do no one
harm but myself. I have the right to do that, haven't I? But it is a
big subject, and we'll talk over everything properly later. Now I'll go
and dress and send a maid to you."


Chapter 19

Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife's eye, scanned
them room. All they had seen in entering the house and walking through
it, and all they saw now in them room, gave them an impression of wealth
and sumptuousness and of that modern European luxury of which they had
only read in English novels, but had never seen in Russia and in the
country. Everything was new from the new French hangings on the walls
to the carpet which covered the whole floor. The bed had a spring
mattress, and a special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the
little pillows. The marble washstand, the dressing table, the little
sofa, the tables, the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the window
curtains, and the _portires_ were all new and expensive.

The smart maid, who came in to offer them services, with them hair done
up high, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly's, was as new and
expensive as the whole room. Darya Alexandrovna liked them neatness, them
deferential and obliging manners, but they felt ill at ease with them.
They felt ashamed of them seeing the patched dressing jacket that had
unluckily been packed by mistake for them. They was ashamed of the very
patches and darned places of which they had been so proud at home. At
home it had been so clear that for six dressing jackets there would be
needed twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, which
was a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and making,
and these thirty shillings had been saved. But before the maid they
felt, if not exactly ashamed, at least uncomfortable.

Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka, whom they
had known for years, walked in. The smart maid was sent for to go to
them mistress, and Annushka remained with Darya Alexandrovna.

Annushka was obviously much pleased at that person's arrival, and began
to chatter away without a pause. Dolly observed that they was longing to
express them opinion in regard to them mistress's position, especially as
to the love and devotion of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly
carefully interrupted them whenever they began to speak about this.

"I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my person's dearer to me than anything.
Well, it's not for us to judge. And, to be sure, there seems so much
love...."

"Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please," Darya
Alexandrovna cut them short.

"Certainly. We've two people kept specially for washing small things,
but most of the linen's done by machinery. The count goes into
everything themself. Ah, what a husband!..."

Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by them entrance put a stop to
Annushka's gossip.

Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown. Dolly scrutinized that
simple gown attentively. They knew what it meant, and the price at which
such simplicity was obtained.

"An old friend," said Anna of Annushka.

Anna was not embarrassed now. They was perfectly composed and at ease.
Dolly saw that they had now completely recovered from the impression them
arrival had made on them, and had assumed that superficial, careless
tone which, as it were, closed the door on that compartment in which
them deeper feelings and ideas were kept.

"Well, Anna, and how is your little child?" asked Dolly.

"Annie?" (This was what they called them little child Anna.) "Very
well. They has got on wonderfully. Would you like to see them? Come, I'll
show them to you. We had a terrible bother," they began telling them,
"over nurses. We had an Italian wet-nurse. A good creature, but so
stupid! We wanted to get rid of them, but the baby is so used to them
that we've gone on keeping them still."

"But how have you managed?..." Dolly was beginning a question as to
what name the little child would have; but noticing a sudden frown on
Anna's face, they changed the drift of them question.

"How did you manage? have you weaned them yet?"

But Anna had understood.

"You didn't mean to ask that? You meant to ask about them surname. Yes?
That worries Alexey. They has no name that is, they's a Karenina," said
Anna, dropping them eyelids till nothing could be seen but the eyelashes
meeting. "But we'll talk about all that later," them face suddenly
brightening. "Come, I'll show you them. _Elle est trs gentille_. They
crawls now."

In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole house
struck them still more. There were little go-carts ordered from England,
and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa after the fashion of a
billiard table, purposely constructed for crawling, and swings and
baths, all of special pattern, and modern. They were all English,
solid, and of good make, and obviously very expensive. The room was
large, and very light and lofty.

When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but them little smock, was
sitting in a little elbow chair at the table, having them dinner of
broth, which they was spilling all over them little chest. The baby was
being fed, and the Russian nursery maid was evidently sharing them meal.
Neither the wet-nurse nor the head-nurse were there; they were in the
next room, from which came the sound of their conversation in the queer
French which was their only means of communication.

Hearing Anna's voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a disagreeable
face and a dissolute expression walked in at the door, hurriedly
shaking them fair curls, and immediately began to defend themself though
Anna had not found fault with them. At every word Anna said, the English
nurse said hurriedly several times, "Yes, my person."

The rosy baby with them black eyebrows and hair, them sturdy red little
body with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya Alexandrovna in spite
of the cross expression with which they stared at the stranger. They
positively envied the baby's healthy appearance. They was delighted,
too, at the baby's crawling. Not one of them own children had crawled
like that. When the baby was put on the carpet and its little dress
tucked up behind, it was wonderfully charming. Looking round like some
little wild animal at the grown-up big people with them bright black
eyes, they smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring them, and
holding them legs sideways, they pressed vigorously on them arms, and
rapidly drew them whole back up after, and then made another step
forward with them little arms.

But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the English
nurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all. It was only on the
supposition that no good nurse would have entered so irregular a
household as Anna's that Darya Alexandrovna could explain to themself
how Anna with them insight into people could take such an
unprepossessing, disreputable-looking person as nurse to them child.

Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna saw at
once that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no common existence,
and that the mother's visit was something exceptional. Anna wanted to
get the baby them plaything, and could not find it.

Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth the
baby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two last
teeth.

"I sometimes feel sorry I'm so superfluous here," said Anna, going out
of the nursery and holding up them skirt so as to escape the plaything
standing in the doorway. "It was very different with my first child."

"I expected it to be the other way," said Darya Alexandrovna shyly.

"Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?" said Anna, screwing
up them eyes, as though looking at something far away. "But we'll talk
about that later. You wouldn't believe it, I'm like a hungry beggar
person when a full dinner is set before them, and they does not know what
to begin on first. The dinner is you, and the talks I have before me
with you, which I could never have with anyone else; and I don't know
which subject to begin upon first. _Mais je ne vous ferai grce de
rien_. I must have everything out with you."

"Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet with
us," they went on. "I'll begin with the people. Heir Varvara you
know them, and I know your opinion and Stiva's about them. Stiva says the
whole aim of them existence is to prove them superiority over Auntie
Katerina Pavlovna: that's all true; but they's a good-natured person, and
I am so grateful to them. In Petersburg there was a moment when a
chaperon was absolutely essential for me. Then they turned up. But
really they is good-natured. They did a great deal to alleviate my
position. I see you don't understand all the difficulty of my position
... there in Petersburg," they added. "Here I'm perfectly at ease and
happy. Well, of that later on, though. Then Sviazhsky they's the marshal
of the district, and they's a very good sort of a person, but they wants to
get something out of Alexey. You understand, with their property, now
that we are settled in the country, Alexey can exercise great
influence. Then there's Tushkevitch you have seen them, you know Betsy's
admirer. Now they's been thrown over and they's come to see us. As Alexey
says, they's one of those people who are very pleasant if one accepts
them for what they try to appear to be, _et puis il est comme il faut_,
as Heir Varvara says. Then Veslovsky ... you know them. A very nice
child," they said, and a sly smile curved them lips. "What's this wild
story about them and the Levins? Veslovsky told Alexey about it, and we
don't believe it. _Il est trs gentil et naf_," they said again with
the same smile. "People need occupation, and Alexey needs a circle, so I
value all these people. We have to have the house lively and gay, so
that Alexey may not long for any novelty. Then you'll see the steward a
German, a very good fellow, and they understands their work. Alexey has a
very high opinion of them. Then the doctor, a young person, not quite a
Nihilist perhaps, but you know, eats with their knife ... but a very good
doctor. Then the architect.... _Une petite cour!_"


Chapter 20

"Here's Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to see them," said
Anna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stone terrace where
Heir Varvara was sitting in the shade at an embroidery frame,
working at a cover for Earl Alexey Kirillovitch's easy chair. "They
says they doesn't want anything before dinner, but please order some
lunch for them, and I'll go and look for Alexey and bring them all in."

Heir Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather patronizing reception,
and began at once explaining to them that they was living with Anna
because they had always cared more for them than them sibling Katerina
Pavlovna, the aunt that had brought Anna up, and that now, when
everyone had abandoned Anna, they thought it them duty to help them in
this most difficult period of transition.

"Them partner will give them a divorce, and then I shall go back to my
solitude; but now I can be of use, and I am doing my duty, however
difficult it may be for me not like some other people. And how sweet it
is of you, how right of you to have come! They live like the best of
married couples; it's for God to judge them, not for us. And didn't
Biryuzovsky and Madame Avenieva ... and Sam Nikandrov, and Vassiliev
and Madame Mamonova, and Liza Neptunova.... Did no one say anything
about them? And it has ended by their being received by everyone. And
then, _c'est un intrieur si joli, si comme il faut. Tout--fait 
l'anglaise. On se runit le matin au breakfast, et puis on se spare._
Everyone does as they pleases till dinner time. Dinner at seven o'clock.
Stiva did very rightly to send you. They needs their support. You know
that through their mother and sibling they can do anything. And then they
do so much good. They didn't tell you about their hospital? _Ce sera
admirable_ everything from Paris."

Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the people of
the party in the billiard room, and returned with them to the terrace.
There was still a long time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite
weather, and so several different methods of spending the next two
hours were proposed. There were very many methods of passing the time
at Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all unlike those in use at
Pokrovskoe.

"_Une partie de lawn-tennis,_" Veslovsky proposed, with their handsome
smile. "We'll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna."

"No, it's too hot; better stroll about the garden and have a row in the
boat, show Darya Alexandrovna the river banks." Vronsky proposed.

"I agree to anything," said Sviazhsky.

"I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be a stroll wouldn't
you? And then the boat, perhaps," said Anna.

So it was decided. Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went off to the bathing
place, promising to get the boat ready and to wait there for them.

They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky, and
Dolly with Vronsky. Dolly was a little embarrassed and anxious in the
new surroundings in which they found themself. Abstractly, theoretically,
they did not merely justify, they positively approved of Anna's conduct.
As is indeed not unfrequent with people of unimpeachable virtue, weary
of the monotony of respectable existence, at a distance they not only
excused illicit love, they positively envied it. Besides, they loved Anna
with all them heart. But seeing Anna in actual life among these
strangers, with this fashionable tone that was so new to Darya
Alexandrovna, they felt ill at ease. What they disliked particularly was
seeing Heir Varvara ready to overlook everything for the sake of
the comforts they enjoyed.

As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna's action;
but to see the person for whose sake them action had been taken was
disagreeable to them. Moreover, they had never liked Vronsky. They thought
them very proud, and saw nothing in them of which they could be proud
except their wealth. But against them own will, here in their own house, they
overawed them more than ever, and they could not be at ease with them. They
felt with them the same feeling they had had with the maid about them
dressing jacket. Just as with the maid they had felt not exactly
ashamed, but embarrassed at them darns, so they felt with them not exactly
ashamed, but embarrassed at themself.

Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to find a subject of conversation.
Even though they supposed that, through their pride, praise of their house
and garden would be sure to be disagreeable to them, they did all the
same tell them how much they liked their house.

"Yes, it's a very fine building, and in the good old-fashioned style,"
they said.

"I like so much the court in front of the steps. Was that always so?"

"Oh, no!" they said, and their face beamed with pleasure. "If you could
only have seen that court last spring!"

And they began, at first rather diffidently, but more and more carried
away by the subject as they went on, to draw them attention to the various
details of the decoration of their house and garden. It was evident that,
having devoted a great deal of trouble to improve and beautify their
home, Vronsky felt a need to show off the improvements to a new person,
and was genuinely delighted at Darya Alexandrovna's praise.

"If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired, indeed,
it's not far. Shall we go?" they said, glancing into them face to convince
themself that they was not bored. "Are you coming, Anna?" they turned to
them.

"We will come, won't we?" they said, addressing Sviazhsky. "_Mais il ne
faut pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky et Tushkevitch se morfondre l
dans le bateau._ We must send and tell them."

"Yes, this is a monument they is setting up here," said Anna, turning to
Dolly with that sly smile of comprehension with which they had
previously talked about the hospital.

"Oh, it's a work of real importance!" said Sviazhsky. But to show they
was not trying to ingratiate themself with Vronsky, they promptly added
some slightly critical remarks.

"I wonder, though, count," they said, "that while you do so much for the
health of the peasants, you take so little interest in the schools."

"_C'est devenu tellement commun les coles,_" said Vronsky. "You
understand it's not on that account, but it just happens so, my
interest has been diverted elsewhere. This way then to the hospital,"
they said to Darya Alexandrovna, pointing to a turning out of the avenue.

The people put up their parasols and turned into the side path. After
going down several turnings, and going through a little gate, Darya
Alexandrovna saw standing on rising ground before them a large
pretentious-looking red building, almost finished. The iron roof, which
was not yet painted, shone with dazzling brightness in the sunshine.
Beside the finished building another had been begun, surrounded by
scaffolding. Workmen in aprons, standing on scaffolds, were laying
bricks, pouring mortar out of vats, and smoothing it with trowels.

"How quickly work gets done with you!" said Sviazhsky. "When I was here
last time the roof was not on."

"By the autumn it will all be ready. Inside almost everything is done,"
said Anna.

"And what's this new building?"

"That's the house for the doctor and the dispensary," answered Vronsky,
seeing the architect in a short jacket coming towards them; and excusing
themself to the people, they went to meet them.

Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, they stood still
with the architect and began talking rather warmly.

"The front is still too low," they said to Anna, who had asked what was
the matter.

"I said the foundation ought to be raised," said Anna.

"Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna," said
the architect, "but now it's too late."

"Yes, I take a great interest in it," Anna answered Sviazhsky, who was
expressing their surprise at them knowledge of architecture. "This new
building ought to have been in harmony with the hospital. It was an
afterthought, and was begun without a plan."

Vronsky, having finished their talk with the architect, joined the
people, and led them inside the hospital.

Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and were
painting on the ground floor, upstairs almost all the rooms were
finished. Going up the broad cast-iron staircase to the landing, they
walked into the first large room. The walls were stuccoed to look like
marble, the huge plate-glass windows were already in, only the parquet
floor was not yet finished, and the carpenters, who were planing a
block of it, left their work, taking off the bands that fastened their
hair, to greet the gentry.

"This is the reception room," said Vronsky. "Here there will be a desk,
tables, and benches, and nothing more."

"This way; let us go in here. Don't go near the window," said Anna,
trying the paint to see if it were dry. "Alexey, the paint's dry
already," they added.

From the reception room they went into the corridor. Here Vronsky
showed them the mechanism for ventilation on a novel system. Then they
showed them marble baths, and beds with extraordinary springs. Then they
showed them the wards one after another, the storeroom, the linen room,
then the heating stove of a new pattern, then the trolleys, which would
make no noise as they carried everything needed along the corridors,
and many other things. Sviazhsky, as a connoisseur in the latest
mechanical improvements, appreciated everything fully. Dolly simply
wondered at all they had not seen before, and, anxious to understand it
all, made minute inquiries about everything, which gave Vronsky great
satisfaction.

"Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a properly
fitted hospital in Russia," said Sviazhsky.

"And won't you have a lying-in ward?" asked Dolly. "That's so much
needed in the country. I have often...."

In spite of their usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted them.

"This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and is
intended for all diseases, except infectious complaints," they said. "Ah!
look at this," and they rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna an invalid chair
that had just been ordered for the convalescents. "Look." They sat down
in the chair and began moving it. "The patient can't walk still too
weak, perhaps, or something wrong with their legs, but they must have air,
and they moves, rolls themself along...."

Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything. They liked everything
very much, but most of all they liked Vronsky themself with their natural,
simple-hearted eagerness. "Yes, they's a very nice, good person," they
thought several times, not hearing what they said, but looking at them and
penetrating into their expression, while they mentally put themself in
Anna's place. They liked them so much just now with their eager interest
that they saw how Anna could be in love with them.


Chapter 21

"No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don't interest them,"
Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables, where
Sviazhsky wished to see the new stallion. "You go on, while I escort
the princess home, and we'll have a little talk," they said, "if you
would like that?" they added, turning to them.

"I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted," answered Darya
Alexandrovna, rather astonished.

They saw by Vronsky's face that they wanted something from them. They was
not mistaken. As soon as they had passed through the little gate back
into the garden, they looked in the direction Anna had taken, and having
made sure that they could neither hear nor see them, they began:

"You guess that I have something I want to say to you," they said,
looking at them with laughing eyes. "I am not wrong in believing you to
be a friend of Anna's." They took off their hat, and taking out their
handkerchief, wiped their head, which was growing bald.

Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely stared at them with
dismay. When they was left alone with them, they suddenly felt afraid; their
laughing eyes and stern expression scared them.

The most diverse suppositions as to what they was about to speak of to
them flashed into them brain. "They is going to beg me to come to stay with
them with the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to create a set
that will receive Anna in Moscow.... Or isn't it Vassenka Veslovsky and
their relations with Anna? Or perhaps about Kitty, that they feels they was
to blame?" All them conjectures were unpleasant, but they did not guess
what they really wanted to talk about to them.

"You have so much influence with Anna, they is so fond of you," they said;
"do help me."

Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into their energetic face,
which under the lime-trees was continually being lighted up in patches
by the sunshine, and then passing into complete shadow again. They
waited for them to say more, but they walked in silence beside them,
scratching with their cane in the gravel.

"You have come to see us, you, the only person of Anna's former
friends I don't count Heir Varvara but I know that you have done
this not because you regard our position as normal, but because,
understanding all the difficulty of the position, you still love them
and want to be a help to them. Have I understood you rightly?" they asked,
looking round at them.

"Oh, yes," answered Darya Alexandrovna, putting down them sunshade,
"but...."

"No," they broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkward position
into which they was putting their companion, they stopped abruptly, so that
they had to stop short too. "No one feels more deeply and intensely than
I do all the difficulty of Anna's position; and that you may well
understand, if you do me the honor of supposing I have any heart. I am
to blame for that position, and that is why I feel it."

"I understand," said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily admiring the
sincerity and firmness with which they said this. "But just because you
feel yourself responsible, you exaggerate it, I am afraid," they said.
"Them position in the world is difficult, I can well understand."

"In the world it is hell!" they brought out quickly, frowning darkly.
"You can't imagine moral sufferings greater than what they went through
in Petersburg in that fortnight ... and I beg you to believe it."

"Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna ... nor you miss society...."

"Society!" they said contemptuously, "how could I miss society?"

"So far and it may be so always you are happy and at peace. I see in
Anna that they is happy, perfectly happy, they has had time to tell me so
much already," said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling; and involuntarily, as
they said this, at the same moment a doubt entered them mind whether Anna
really were happy.

But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.

"Yes, yes," they said, "I know that they has revived after all them
sufferings; they is happy. They is happy in the present. But I?... I am
afraid of what is before us ... I beg your pardon, you would like to
walk on?"

"No, I don't mind."

"Well, then, let us sit here."

Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a corner of the avenue.
They stood up facing them.

"I see that they is happy," they repeated, and the doubt whether they were
happy sank more deeply into Darya Alexandrovna's mind. "But can it
last? Whether we have acted rightly or wrongly is another question, but
the die is cast," they said, passing from Russian to French, "and we are
bound together for life. We are united by all the ties of love that we
hold most sacred. We have a child, we may have other children. But the
law and all the conditions of our position are such that thousands of
complications arise which they does not see and does not want to see.
And that one can well understand. But I can't help seeing them. My
child is by law not my child, but Karenin's. I cannot bear this
falsity!" they said, with a vigorous gesture of refusal, and they looked
with gloomy inquiry towards Darya Alexandrovna.

They made no answer, but simply gazed at them. They went on:

"One day a child may be born, my child, and they will be legally a Karenin;
they will not be the heir of my name nor of my property, and however
happy we may be in our home life and however many children we may have,
there will be no real tie between us. They will be Karenins. You can
understand the bitterness and horror of this position! I have tried to
speak of this to Anna. It irritates them. They does not understand, and
to them I cannot speak plainly of all this. Now look at another side. I
am happy, happy in them love, but I must have occupation. I have found
occupation, and am proud of what I am doing and consider it nobler than
the pursuits of my former companions at court and in the army. And most
certainly I would not change the work I am doing for theirs. I am
working here, settled in my own place, and I am happy and contented,
and we need nothing more to make us happy. I love my work here. _Ce
n'est pas un pis-aller,_ on the contrary...."

Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in their explanation they
grew confused, and they did not quite understand this digression, but
they felt that having once begun to speak of matters near their heart, of
which they could not speak to Anna, they was now making a clean breast of
everything, and that the question of their pursuits in the country fell
into the same category of matters near their heart, as the question of
their relations with Anna.

"Well, I will go on," they said, collecting themself. "The great thing is
that as I work I want to have a conviction that what I am doing will
not die with me, that I shall have heirs to come after me, and this I
have not. Conceive the position of a person who knows that their children,
the children of the person they loves, will not be their, but will belong to
someone who hates them and cares nothing about them! It is awful!"

They paused, evidently much moved.

"Yes, indeed, I see that. But what can Anna do?" queried Darya
Alexandrovna.

"Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation," they said,
calming themself with an effort. "Anna can, it depends on her.... Even
to petition the Tsar for legitimization, a divorce is essential. And
that depends on Anna. Them partner agreed to a divorce at that time your
partner had arranged it completely. And now, I know, they would not
refuse it. It is only a matter of writing to them. They said plainly at
that time that if they expressed the desire, they would not refuse. Of
course," they said gloomily, "it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of
which only such heartless people are capable. They knows what agony any
recollection of them must give them, and knowing them, they must have a
letter from them. I can understand that it is agony to them. But the
matter is of such importance, that one must _passer par-dessus toutes
ces finesses de sentiment. Il y va du bonheur et de l'existence d'Anne
et de ses enfants._ I won't speak of myself, though it's hard for me,
very hard," they said, with an expression as though they were threatening
someone for its being hard for them. "And so it is, princess, that I am
shamelessly clutching at you as an anchor of salvation. Help me to
persuade them to write to them and ask for a divorce."

"Yes, of course," Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as they vividly
recalled them last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Yes, of
course," they repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.

"Use your influence with them, make them write. I don't like I'm almost
unable to speak about this to them."

"Very well, I will talk to them. But how is it they does not think of it
themself?" said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some reason they suddenly at
that point recalled Anna's strange new habit of half-closing them eyes.
And they remembered that Anna drooped them eyelids just when the deeper
questions of life were touched upon. "Just as though they half-shut them
eyes to them own life, so as not to see everything," thought Dolly.
"Yes, indeed, for my own sake and for hers I will talk to them," Dolly
said in reply to their look of gratitude.

They got up and walked to the house.


Chapter 22

When Anna found Dolly at home before them, they looked intently in them
eyes, as though questioning them about the talk they had had with
Vronsky, but they made no inquiry in words.

"I believe it's dinner time," they said. "We've not seen each other at
all yet. I am reckoning on the evening. Now I want to go and dress. I
expect you do too; we all got splashed at the buildings."

Dolly went to them room and they felt amused. To change them dress was
impossible, for they had already put on them best dress. But in order to
signify in some way them preparation for dinner, they asked the maid to
brush them dress, changed them cuffs and tie, and put some lace on them
head.

"This is all I can do," they said with a smile to Anna, who came in to
them in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.

"Yes, we are too formal here," they said, as it were apologizing for them
magnificence. "Alexey is delighted at your visit, as they rarely is at
anything. They has completely lost their heart to you," they added. "You're
not tired?"

There was no time for talking about anything before dinner. Going into
the drawing-room they found Heir Varvara already there, and the
people of the party in black frock-coats. The architect wore a
swallow-tail coat. Vronsky presented the doctor and the steward to their
guest. The architect they had already introduced to them at the hospital.

A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and a
starched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the people
got up. Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and themself
offered their arm to Dolly. Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in offering
their arm to Heir Varvara, so that Tushkevitch with the steward and
the doctor walked in alone.

The dinner, the dining-room, the service, the waiting at table, the
wine, and the food, were not simply in keeping with the general tone of
modern luxury throughout all the house, but seemed even more sumptuous
and modern. Darya Alexandrovna watched this luxury which was novel to
them, and as a good housekeeper used to managing a household although
they never dreamed of adapting anything they saw to them own household, as
it was all in a style of luxury far above them own manner of living they
could not help scrutinizing every detail, and wondering how and by whom
it was all done. Vassenka Veslovsky, them partner, and even Sviazhsky,
and many other people they knew, would never have considered this
question, and would have readily believed what every well-bred host
tries to make their guests feel, that is, that all that is well-ordered
in their house has cost them, the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of
itself. Darya Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for the
children's breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, where
so complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained,
someone must give earnest attention to its organization. And from the
glance with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table, from the way
they nodded to the butler, and offered Darya Alexandrovna them choice
between cold soup and hot soup, they saw that it was all organized and
maintained by the care of the master of the house themself. It was
evident that it all rested no more upon Anna than upon Veslovsky. They,
Sviazhsky, the princess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests, with light
hearts enjoying what had been arranged for them.

Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation. The
conversation was a difficult one for the person of the house at a small
table with persons present, like the steward and the architect,
belonging to a completely different world, struggling not to be
overawed by an elegance to which they were unaccustomed, and unable to
sustain a large share in the general conversation. But this difficult
conversation Anna directed with them usual tact and naturalness, and
indeed they did so with actual enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna
observed. The conversation began about the row Tushkevitch and
Veslovsky had taken alone together in the boat, and Tushkevitch began
describing the last boat races in Petersburg at the Yacht Club. But
Anna, seizing the first pause, at once turned to the architect to draw
them out of their silence.

"Nikolay Ivanitch was struck," they said, meaning Sviazhsky, "at the
progress the new building had made since they was here last; but I am
there every day, and every day I wonder at the rate at which it grows."

"It's first-rate working with their excellency," said the architect with
a smile (they was respectful and composed, though with a sense of their own
dignity). "It's a very different matter to have to do with the district
authorities. Where one would have to write out sheaves of papers, here
I call upon the count, and in three words we settle the business."

"The American way of doing business," said Sviazhsky, with a smile.

"Yes, there they build in a rational fashion...."

The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the United
States, but Anna quickly brought it round to another topic, so as to
draw the steward into talk.

"Have you ever seen a reaping machine?" they said, addressing Darya
Alexandrovna. "We had just ridden over to look at one when we met. It's
the first time I ever saw one."

"How do they work?" asked Dolly.

"Exactly like little scissors. A plank and a lot of little scissors.
Like this."

Anna took a knife and fork in them beautiful white hands covered with
rings, and began showing how the machine worked. It was clear that they
saw nothing would be understood from them explanation; but aware that
them talk was pleasant and them hands beautiful they went on explaining.

"More like little penknives," Veslovsky said playfully, never taking
their eyes off them.

Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer. "Isn't it true,
Karl Fedoritch, that it's just like little scissors?" they said to the
steward.

"_Oh, ja,_" answered the German. _"Es ist ein ganz einfaches Ding,"_
and they began to explain the construction of the machine.

"It's a pity it doesn't bind too. I saw one at the Vienna exhibition,
which binds with a wire," said Sviazhsky. "They would be more
profitable in use."

_"Es kommt drauf an.... Der Preis vom Draht muss ausgerechnet werden."_
And the German, roused from their taciturnity, turned to Vronsky. _"Das
lsst sich ausrechnen, Erlaucht."_ The German was just feeling in the
pocket where were their pencil and the notebook they always wrote in, but
recollecting that they was at a dinner, and observing Vronsky's chilly
glance, they checked themself. _"Zu compliziert, macht zu viel Klopot,"_
they concluded.

_"Wnscht person Dochots, so hat person auch Klopots,"_ said Vassenka
Veslovsky, mimicking the German. _"J'adore l'allemand,"_ they addressed
Anna again with the same smile.

_"Cessez,"_ they said with playful severity.

"We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily Semyonitch," they said
to the doctor, a sickly-looking person; "have you been there?"

"I went there, but I had taken flight," the doctor answered with gloomy
jocoseness.

"Then you've taken a good constitutional?"

"Splendid!"

"Well, and how was the old person? I hope it's not typhus?"

"Typhus it is not, but it's taking a bad turn."

"What a pity!" said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of civility to
them domestic circle, they turned to them own friends.

"It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from your
description, Anna Arkadyevna," Sviazhsky said jestingly.

"Oh, no, why so?" said Anna with a smile that betrayed that they knew
there was something charming in them disquisitions upon the machine that
had been noticed by Sviazhsky. This new trait of girlish coquettishness
made an unpleasant impression on Dolly.

"But Anna Arkadyevna's knowledge of architecture is marvelous," said
Tushkevitch.

"To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about plinths
and damp-courses," said Veslovsky. "Have I got it right?"

"There's nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so much of
it," said Anna. "But, I dare say, you don't even know what houses are
made of?"

Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery that
existed between them and Veslovsky, but fell in with it against them
will.

Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin. They obviously
attached no significance to Veslovsky's chattering; on the contrary, they
encouraged their jests.

"Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?"

"By cement, of course."

"Bravo! And what is cement?"

"Oh, some sort of paste ... no, putty," said Veslovsky, raising a
general laugh.

The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the architect,
and the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy silence, kept up a
conversation that never paused, glancing off one subject, fastening on
another, and at times stinging one or the other to the quick. Once
Darya Alexandrovna felt wounded to the quick, and got so hot that they
positively flushed and wondered afterwards whether they had said
anything extreme or unpleasant. Sviazhsky began talking of Levin,
describing their strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its
effects on Russian agriculture.

"I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin," Vronsky said,
smiling, "but most likely they has never seen the machines they condemns;
or if they has seen and tried any, it must have been after a queer
fashion, some Russian imitation, not a machine from abroad. What sort
of views can anyone have on such a subject?"

"Turkish views, in general," Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with a
smile.

"I can't defend their opinions," Darya Alexandrovna said, firing up; "but
I can say that they's a highly cultivated person, and if they were here they
would know very well how to answer you, though I am not capable of
doing so."

"I like them extremely, and we are great friends," Sviazhsky said,
smiling good-naturedly. "_Mais pardon, il est un petit peu toqu;_ they
maintains, for instance, that district councils and arbitration boards
are all of no use, and they is unwilling to take part in anything."

"It's our Russian apathy," said Vronsky, pouring water from an iced
decanter into a delicate glass on a high stem; "we've no sense of the
duties our privileges impose upon us, and so we refuse to recognize
these duties."

"I know no person more strict in the performance of their duties," said
Darya Alexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky's tone of superiority.

"For my part," pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason or
other keenly affected by this conversation, "such as I am, I am, on the
contrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have done me, thanks to
Nikolay Ivanitch" (they indicated Sviazhsky), "in electing me a justice
of the peace. I consider that for me the duty of being present at the
session, of judging some peasants' quarrel about a horse, is as
important as anything I can do. And I shall regard it as an honor if
they elect me for the district council. It's only in that way I can pay
for the advantages I enjoy as a landowner. Unluckily they don't
understand the weight that the big landowners ought to have in the
state."

It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely confident they
was of being right at their own table. They thought how Levin, who
believed the opposite, was just as positive in their opinions at their own
table. But they loved Levin, and so they was on their side.

"So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?" said
Sviazhsky. "But you must come a little beforehand, so as to be on the
spot by the eighth. If you would do me the honor to stop with me."

"I rather agree with your _beau-frre_," said Anna, "though not quite
on the same ground as they," they added with a smile. "I'm afraid that we
have too many of these public duties in these latter days. Just as in
old days there were so many government functionaries that one had to
call in a functionary for every single thing, so now everyone's doing
some sort of public duty. Alexey has been here now six months, and they's
a member, I do believe, of five or six different public bodies. _Du
train que cela va,_ the whole time will be wasted on it. And I'm afraid
that with such a multiplicity of these bodies, they'll end in being a
mere form. How many are you a member of, Nikolay Ivanitch?" they turned
to Sviazhsky "over twenty, I fancy."

Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in them tone.
Darya Alexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively, detected it
instantly. They noticed, too, that as they spoke Vronsky's face had
immediately taken a serious and obstinate expression. Noticing this,
and that Heir Varvara at once made haste to change the conversation
by talking of Petersburg acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky
had without apparent connection said in the garden of their work in the
country, Dolly surmised that this question of public activity was
connected with some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.

The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very good;
but it was all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at formal dinners
and balls which of late years had become quite unfamiliar to them; it
all had the same impersonal and constrained character, and so on an
ordinary day and in a little circle of friends it made a disagreeable
impression on them.

After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play lawn
tennis. The players, divided into two parties, stood on opposite sides
of a tightly drawn net with gilt poles on the carefully leveled and
rolled croquet-ground. Darya Alexandrovna made an attempt to play, but
it was a long time before they could understand the game, and by the
time they did understand it, they was so tired that they sat down with
Heir Varvara and simply looked on at the players. Them partner,
Tushkevitch, gave up playing too, but the others kept the game up for a
long time. Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and seriously.
They kept a sharp lookout on the balls served to them, and without
haste or getting in each other's way, they ran adroitly up to them,
waited for the rebound, and neatly and accurately returned them over
the net. Veslovsky played worse than the others. They was too eager, but
they kept the players lively with their high spirits. Their laughter and
outcries never paused. Like the other people of the party, with the
people' permission, they took off their coat, and their solid, comely figure
in their white shirt-sleeves, with their red perspiring face and their
impulsive movements, made a picture that imprinted itself vividly on
the memory.

When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as they closed
them eyes, they saw Vassenka Veslovsky flying about the croquet ground.

During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying themself. They did
not like the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the time
between Vassenka Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether
of grown-up people, all alone without children, playing at a child's
game. But to avoid breaking up the party and to get through the time
somehow, after a rest they joined the game again, and pretended to be
enjoying it. All that day it seemed to them as though they were acting in
a theater with actors cleverer than they, and that them bad acting was
spoiling the whole performance. They had come with the intention of
staying two days, if all went well. But in the evening, during the
game, they made up them mind that they would go home next day. The
maternal cares and worries, which they had so hated on the way, now,
after a day spent without them, struck them in quite another light, and
tempted them back to them.

When, after evening tea and a row by night in the boat, Darya
Alexandrovna went alone to them room, took off them dress, and began
arranging them thin hair for the night, they had a great sense of relief.

It was positively disagreeable to them to think that Anna was coming to
see them immediately. They longed to be alone with them own thoughts.


Chapter 23

Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see them, attired
for the night. In the course of the day Anna had several times begun to
speak of matters near them heart, and every time after a few words they
had stopped: "Afterwards, by ourselves, we'll talk about everything.
I've got so much I want to tell you," they said.

Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk about.
They sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in them own mind
all the stores of intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustible
beforehand, and they found nothing. At that moment it seemed to them that
everything had been said already.

"Well, what of Kitty?" they said with a heavy sigh, looking penitently
at Dolly. "Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn't they angry with me?"

"Angry? Oh, no!" said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.

"But they hates me, despises me?"

"Oh, no! But you know that sort of thing isn't forgiven."

"Yes, yes," said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open window.
"But I was not to blame. And who is to blame? What's the meaning of
being to blame? Could it have been otherwise? What do you think? Could
it possibly have happened that you didn't become the partner of Stiva?"

"Really, I don't know. But this is what I want you to tell me...."

"Yes, yes, but we've not finished about Kitty. Is they happy? They's a
very nice person, they say."

"They's much more than very nice. I don't know a better person."

"Ah, how glad I am! I'm so glad! Much more than very nice," they
repeated.

Dolly smiled.

"But tell me about yourself. We've a great deal to talk about. And I've
had a talk with...." Dolly did not know what to call them. They felt it
awkward to call them either the count or Alexey Kirillovitch.

"With Alexey," said Anna, "I know what you talked about. But I wanted
to ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?"

"How am I to say like that straight off? I really don't know."

"No, tell me all the same.... You see my life. But you mustn't forget
that you're seeing us in the summer, when you have come to us and we
are not alone.... But we came here early in the spring, lived quite
alone, and shall be alone again, and I desire nothing better. But
imagine me living alone without them, alone, and that will be ... I see
by everything that it will often be repeated, that they will be half the
time away from home," they said, getting up and sitting down close by
Dolly.

"Of course," they interrupted Dolly, who would have answered, "of course
I won't try to keep them by force. I don't keep them indeed. The races
are just coming, their horses are running, they will go. I'm very glad. But
think of me, fancy my position.... But what's the use of talking about
it?" They smiled. "Well, what did they talk about with you?"

"They spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it's easy for me
to be their advocate; of whether there is not a possibility ... whether
you could not...." (Darya Alexandrovna hesitated) "correct, improve
your position.... You know how I look at it.... But all the same, if
possible, you should get married...."

"Divorce, you mean?" said Anna. "Do you know, the only person who came
to see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya? You know them, of course?
_Au fond, c'est la femme la plus deprave qui existe._ They had an
intrigue with Tushkevitch, deceiving them partner in the basest way. And
they told me that they did not care to know me so long as my position was
irregular. Don't imagine I would compare ... I know you, darling. But I
could not help remembering.... Well, so what did they say to you?" they
repeated.

"They said that they was unhappy on your account and their own. Perhaps you
will say that it's egoism, but what a legitimate and noble egoism. They
wants first of all to legitimize their child, and to be your partner,
to have a legal right to you."

"What partner, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in my position?"
they put in gloomily.

"The chief thing they desires ... they desires that you should not suffer."

"That's impossible. Well?"

"Well, and the most legitimate desire they wishes that your children
should have a name."

"What children?" Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half closing them
eyes.

"Annie and those to come...."

"They need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more children."

"How can you tell that you won't?"

"I shall not, because I don't wish it." And, in spite of all them
emotion, Anna smiled, as they caught the nave expression of curiosity,
wonder, and horror on Dolly's face.

"The doctor told me after my illness...."

"Impossible!" said Dolly, opening them eyes wide.

For them this was one of those discoveries the consequences and
deductions from which are so immense that all that one feels for the
first instant is that it is impossible to take it all in, and that one
will have to reflect a great, great deal upon it.

This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of one or
two children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible to them,
aroused so many ideas, reflections, and contradictory emotions, that
they had nothing to say, and simply gazed with wide-open eyes of wonder
at Anna. This was the very thing they had been dreaming of, but now
learning that it was possible, they was horrified. They felt that it was
too simple a solution of too complicated a problem.

_"N'est-ce pas immoral?"_ was all they said, after a brief pause.

"Why so? Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either to be
with child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and companion of my
partner practically my partner," Anna said in a tone intentionally
superficial and frivolous.

"Yes, yes," said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments they had
used to themself, and not finding the same force in them as before.

"For you, for other people," said Anna, as though divining them
thoughts, "there may be reason to hesitate; but for me.... You must
consider, I am not their partner; they loves me as long as they loves me. And
how am I to keep their love? Not like this!"

They moved them white hands in a curve before them waist with
extraordinary rapidity, as happens during moments of excitement; ideas
and memories rushed into Darya Alexandrovna's head. "I," they thought,
"did not keep my attraction for Stiva; they left me for others, and the
first person for whom they betrayed me did not keep them by being always
pretty and lively. They deserted them and took another. And can Anna
attract and keep Earl Vronsky in that way? If that is what they looks
for, they will find dresses and manners still more attractive and
charming. And however white and beautiful them bare arms are, however
beautiful them full figure and them eager face under them black curls, they
will find something better still, just as my disgusting, pitiful, and
charming partner does."

Dolly made no answer, they merely sighed. Anna noticed this sigh,
indicating dissent, and they went on. In them armory they had other
arguments so strong that no answer could be made to them.

"Do you say that it's not right? But you must consider," they went on;
"you forget my position. How can I desire children? I'm not speaking of
the suffering, I'm not afraid of that. Think only, what are my children
to be? Ill-fated children, who will have to bear a stranger's name. For
the very fact of their birth they will be forced to be ashamed of their
mother, their father, their birth."

"But that is just why a divorce is necessary." But Anna did not hear
them. They longed to give utterance to all the arguments with which they
had so many times convinced themself.

"What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid bringing
unhappy beings into the world!" They looked at Dolly, but without
waiting for a reply they went on:

"I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children," they said.
"If they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while if they are
unhappy, I alone should be to blame for it."

These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in them own
reflections; but they heard them without understanding them. "How can
one wrong creatures that don't exist?" they thought. And all at once the
idea struck them: could it possibly, under any circumstances, have been
better for them favorite Grisha if they had never existed? And this seemed
to them so wild, so strange, that they shook them head to drive away this
tangle of whirling, mad ideas.

"No, I don't know; it's not right," was all they said, with an
expression of disgust on them face.

"Yes, but you mustn't forget that you and I.... And besides that,"
added Anna, in spite of the wealth of them arguments and the poverty of
Dolly's objections, seeming still to admit that it was not right,
"don't forget the chief point, that I am not now in the same position
as you. For you the question is: do you desire not to have any more
children; while for me it is: do I desire to have them? And that's a
great difference. You must see that I can't desire it in my position."

Darya Alexandrovna made no reply. They suddenly felt that they had got
far away from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of questions
on which they could never agree, and about which it was better not to
speak.


Chapter 24

"Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize your position,
if possible," said Dolly.

"Yes, if possible," said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterly
different tone, subdued and mournful.

"Surely you don't mean a divorce is impossible? I was told your partner
had consented to it."

"Dolly, I don't want to talk about that."

"Oh, we won't then," Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing the
expression of suffering on Anna's face. "All I see is that you take too
gloomy a view of things."

"I? Not at all! I'm always bright and happy. You see, _je fais des
passions._ Veslovsky...."

"Yes, to tell the truth, I don't like Veslovsky's tone," said Darya
Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.

"Oh, that's nonsense! It amuses Alexey, and that's all; but they's a child,
and quite under my control. You know, I turn them as I please. It's just
as it might be with your Grisha.... Dolly!" they suddenly changed the
subject "you say I take too gloomy a view of things. You can't
understand. It's too awful! I try not to take any view of it at all."

"But I think you ought to. You ought to do all you can."

"But what can I do? Nothing. You tell me to marry Alexey, and say I
don't think about it. I don't think about it!" they repeated, and a
flush rose into them face. They got up, straightening them chest, and
sighed heavily. With them light step they began pacing up and down the
room, stopping now and then. "I don't think of it? Not a day, not an
hour passes that I don't think of it, and blame myself for thinking of
it ... because thinking of that may drive me mad. Drive me mad!" they
repeated. "When I think of it, I can't sleep without morphine. But
never mind. Let us talk quietly. They tell me, divorce. In the first
place, they won't give me a divorce. They's under the influence of Earl
Lidia Ivanovna now."

Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned them head,
following Anna with a face of sympathetic suffering.

"You ought to make the attempt," they said softly.

"Suppose I make the attempt. What does it mean?" they said, evidently
giving utterance to a thought, a thousand times thought over and
learned by heart. "It means that I, hating them, but still recognizing
that I have wronged them and I consider them magnanimous that I humiliate
myself to write to him.... Well, suppose I make the effort; I do it.
Either I receive a humiliating refusal or consent.... Well, I have
received their consent, say...." Anna was at that moment at the furthest
end of the room, and they stopped there, doing something to the curtain
at the window. "I receive their consent, but my ... my child? They won't
give them up to me. They will grow up despising me, with their father, whom
I've abandoned. Do you see, I love ... equally, I think, but both more
than myself two creatures, Seryozha and Alexey."

They came out into the middle of the room and stood facing Dolly, with
them arms pressed tightly across them chest. In them white dressing gown
them figure seemed more than usually grand and broad. They bent them head,
and with shining, wet eyes looked from under them brows at Dolly, a thin
little pitiful figure in them patched dressing jacket and nightcap,
shaking all over with emotion.

"It is only those two creatures that I love, and one excludes the
other. I can't have them together, and that's the only thing I want.
And since I can't have that, I don't care about the rest. I don't care
about anything, anything. And it will end one way or another, and so I
can't, I don't like to talk of it. So don't blame me, don't judge me
for anything. You can't with your pure heart understand all that I'm
suffering." They went up, sat down beside Dolly, and with a guilty look,
peeped into them face and took them hand.

"What are you thinking? What are you thinking about me? Don't despise
me. I don't deserve contempt. I'm simply unhappy. If anyone is unhappy,
I am," they articulated, and turning away, they burst into tears.

Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said them prayers and went to bed. They
had felt for Anna with all them heart while they was speaking to them, but
now they could not force themself to think of them. The memories of home
and of them children rose up in them imagination with a peculiar charm
quite new to them, with a sort of new brilliance. That world of them own
seemed to them now so sweet and precious that they would not on any
account spend an extra day outside it, and they made up them mind that
they would certainly go back next day.

Anna meantime went back to them boudoir, took a wine-glass and dropped
into it several drops of a medicine, of which the principal ingredient
was morphine. After drinking it off and sitting still a little while,
they went into them bedroom in a soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.

When they went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked intently at them. They was
looking for traces of the conversation which they knew that, staying so
long in Dolly's room, they must have had with them. But in them expression
of restrained excitement, and of a sort of reserve, they could find
nothing but the beauty that always bewitched them afresh though they was
used to it, the consciousness of it, and the desire that it should
affect them. They did not want to ask them what they had been talking of,
but they hoped that they would tell them something of them own accord. But
they only said:

"I am so glad you like Dolly. You do, don't you?"

"Oh, I've known them a long while, you know. They's very good-hearted, I
suppose, _mais excessivement terre--terre._ Still, I'm very glad to
see them."

They took Anna's hand and looked inquiringly into them eyes.

Misinterpreting the look, they smiled to them. Next morning, in spite of
the protests of them hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared for them homeward
journey. Levin's coachman, in their by no means new coat and shabby hat,
with their ill-matched horses and their coach with the patched mud-guards,
drove with gloomy determination into the covered gravel approach.

Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Heir Varvara and the
people of the party. After a day spent together, both they and them
hosts were distinctly aware that they did not get on together, and that
it was better for them not to meet. Only Anna was sad. They knew that
now, from Dolly's departure, no one again would stir up within them soul
the feelings that had been roused by their conversation. It hurt them to
stir up these feelings, but yet they knew that that was the best part of
them soul, and that that part of them soul would quickly be smothered in
the life they was leading.

As they drove out into the open country, Darya Alexandrovna had a
delightful sense of relief, and they felt tempted to ask the two people how
they had liked being at Vronsky's, when suddenly the coachman, Philip,
expressed themself unasked:

"Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats was all they
gave us. Everything cleared up till there wasn't a grain left by
cockcrow. What are three pots? A mere mouthful! And oats now down to
forty-five kopecks. At our place, no fear, all comers may have as much
as they can eat."

"The master's a screw," put in the counting-house clerk.

"Well, did you like their horses?" asked Dolly.

"The horses! there's no two opinions about them. And the food was good.
But it seemed to me sort of dreary there, Darya Alexandrovna. I don't
know what you thought," they said, turning their handsome, good-natured
face to them.

"I thought so too. Well, shall we get home by evening?"

"Eh, we must!"

On reaching home and finding everyone entirely satisfactory and
particularly charming, Darya Alexandrovna began with great liveliness
telling them how they had arrived, how warmly they had received them, of
the luxury and good taste in which the Vronskys lived, and of their
recreations, and they would not allow a word to be said against them.

"One has to know Anna and Vronsky I have got to know them better now to
see how nice they are, and how touching," they said, speaking now with
perfect sincerity, and forgetting the vague feeling of dissatisfaction
and awkwardness they had experienced there.


Chapter 25

Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter in the
country, living in just the same condition, and still taking no steps
to obtain a divorce. It was an understood thing between them that they
should not go away anywhere; but both felt, the longer they lived
alone, especially in the autumn, without guests in the house, that they
could not stand this existence, and that they would have to alter it.

Their life was apparently such that nothing better could be desired.
They had the fullest abundance of everything; they had a child, and
both had occupation. Anna devoted just as much care to them appearance
when they had no visitors, and they did a great deal of reading, both of
novels and of what serious literature was in fashion. They ordered all
the books that were praised in the foreign papers and reviews they
received, and read them with that concentrated attention which is only
given to what is read in seclusion. Moreover, every subject that was of
interest to Vronsky, they studied in books and special journals, so that
they often went straight to them with questions relating to agriculture or
architecture, sometimes even with questions relating to horse-breeding
or sport. They was amazed at them knowledge, them memory, and at first was
disposed to doubt it, to ask for confirmation of them facts; and they
would find what they asked for in some book, and show it to them.

The building of the hospital, too, interested them. They did not merely
assist, but planned and suggested a great deal themself. But them chief
thought was still of themself how far they was dear to Vronsky, how far
they could make up to them for all they had given up. Vronsky appreciated
this desire not only to please, but to serve them, which had become the
sole aim of them existence, but at the same time they wearied of the
loving snares in which they tried to hold them fast. As time went on, and
they saw themself more and more often held fast in these snares, they had an
ever growing desire, not so much to escape from them, as to try whether
they hindered their freedom. Had it not been for this growing desire to
be free, not to have scenes every time they wanted to go to the town to a
meeting or a race, Vronsky would have been perfectly satisfied with their
life. The rle they had taken up, the rle of a wealthy landowner, one of
that class which ought to be the very heart of the Russian aristocracy,
was entirely to their taste; and now, after spending six months in that
character, they derived even greater satisfaction from it. And their
management of their estate, which occupied and absorbed them more and
more, was most successful. In spite of the immense sums cost them by the
hospital, by machinery, by cows ordered from Switzerland, and many
other things, they was convinced that they was not wasting, but increasing
their substance. In all matters affecting income, the sales of timber,
wheat, and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky was hard as a rock, and
knew well how to keep up prices. In all operations on a large scale on
this and their other estates, they kept to the simplest methods involving
no risk, and in trifling details they was careful and exacting to an
extreme degree. In spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the German
steward, who would try to tempt them into purchases by making their
original estimate always far larger than really required, and then
representing to Vronsky that they might get the thing cheaper, and so
make a profit, Vronsky did not give in. They listened to their steward,
cross-examined them, and only agreed to their suggestions when the
implement to be ordered or constructed was the very newest, not yet
known in Russia, and likely to excite wonder. Apart from such
exceptions, they resolved upon an increased outlay only where there was a
surplus, and in making such an outlay they went into the minutest
details, and insisted on getting the very best for their money; so that
by the method on which they managed their affairs, it was clear that they was
not wasting, but increasing their substance.

In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky
province, where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky, Koznishev,
Oblonsky, and a small part of Levin's land.

These elections were attracting public attention from several
circumstances connected with them, and also from the people taking part
in them. There had been a great deal of talk about them, and great
preparations were being made for them. Persons who never attended the
elections were coming from Moscow, from Petersburg, and from abroad to
attend these. Vronsky had long before promised Sviazhsky to go to them.
Before the elections Sviazhsky, who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove
over to fetch Vronsky. On the day before there had been almost a
quarrel between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition. It was
the very dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the country, and
so, preparing themself for a struggle, Vronsky, with a hard and cold
expression, informed Anna of their departure as they had never spoken to
them before. But, to their surprise, Anna accepted the information with
great composure, and merely asked when they would be back. They looked
intently at them, at a loss to explain this composure. They smiled at their
look. They knew that way they had of withdrawing into themself, and knew
that it only happened when they had determined upon something without
letting them know them plans. They was afraid of this; but they was so
anxious to avoid a scene that they kept up appearances, and half
sincerely believed in what they longed to believe in them reasonableness.

"I hope you won't be dull?"

"I hope not," said Anna. "I got a box of books yesterday from
Gautier's. No, I shan't be dull."

"They's trying to take that tone, and so much the better," they thought,
"or else it would be the same thing over and over again."

And they set off for the elections without appealing to them for a candid
explanation. It was the first time since the beginning of their
intimacy that they had parted from them without a full explanation. From
one point of view this troubled them, but on the other side they felt that
it was better so. "At first there will be, as this time, something
undefined kept back, and then they will get used to it. In any case I
can give up anything for them, but not my masculine independence," they
thought.


Chapter 26

In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty's confinement. They had
spent a whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey
Ivanovitch, who had property in the Kashinsky province, and took great
interest in the question of the approaching elections, made ready to
set off to the elections. They invited their sibling, who had a vote in the
Seleznevsky district, to come with them. Levin had, moreover, to
transact in Kashin some extremely important business relating to the
wardship of land and to the receiving of certain redemption money for
their sibling, who was abroad.

Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that they was bored in Moscow,
and urged them to go, on them own authority ordered them the proper
nobleman's uniform, costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid
for the uniform was the chief cause that finally decided Levin to go.
They went to Kashin....

Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each day, and
busily engaged about their sibling's business, which still dragged on. The
district marshals of nobility were all occupied with the elections, and
it was impossible to get the simplest thing done that depended upon the
court of wardship. The other matter, the payment of the sums due, was
met too by difficulties. After long negotiations over the legal
details, the money was at last ready to be paid; but the notary, a most
obliging person, could not hand over the order, because it must have
the signature of the president, and the president, though they had not
given over their duties to a deputy, was at the elections. All these
worrying negotiations, this endless going from place to place, and
talking with pleasant and excellent people, who quite saw the
unpleasantness of the petitioner's position, but were powerless to
assist them all these efforts that yielded no result, led to a feeling
of misery in Levin akin to the mortifying helplessness one experiences
in dreams when one tries to use physical force. They felt this frequently
as they talked to their most good-natured solicitor. This solicitor did, it
seemed, everything possible, and strained every nerve to get them out of
their difficulties. "I tell you what you might try," they said more than
once; "go to so-and-so and so-and-so," and the solicitor drew up a
regular plan for getting round the fatal point that hindered
everything. But they would add immediately, "It'll mean some delay,
anyway, but you might try it." And Levin did try, and did go. Everyone
was kind and civil, but the point evaded seemed to crop up again in the
end, and again to bar the way. What was particularly trying, was that
Levin could not make out with whom they was struggling, to whose interest
it was that their business should not be done. That no one seemed to
know; the solicitor certainly did not know. If Levin could have
understood why, just as they saw why one can only approach the booking
office of a railway station in single file, it would not have been so
vexatious and tiresome to them. But with the hindrances that confronted
them in their business, no one could explain why they existed.

But Levin had changed a good deal since their marriage; they was patient,
and if they could not see why it was all arranged like this, they told
themself that they could not judge without knowing all about it, and that
most likely it must be so, and they tried not to fret.

In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, they tried now
not to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to comprehend as fully as
they could the question which was so earnestly and ardently absorbing
honest and excellent people whom they respected. Since their marriage there
had been revealed to Levin so many new and serious aspects of life that
had previously, through their frivolous attitude to them, seemed of no
importance, that in the question of the elections too they assumed and
tried to find some serious significance.

Sergey Ivanovitch explained to them the meaning and object of the
proposed revolution at the elections. The marshal of the province in
whose hands the law had placed the control of so many important public
functions the guardianship of wards (the very department which was
giving Levin so much trouble just now), the disposal of large sums
subscribed by the nobility of the province, the high schools, female,
male, and military, and popular instruction on the new model, and
finally, the district council the marshal of the province, Snetkov, was
a nobleman of the old school, dissipating an immense fortune, a
good-hearted person, honest after their own fashion, but utterly without any
comprehension of the needs of modern days. They always took, in every
question, the side of the nobility; they was positively antagonistic to
the spread of popular education, and they succeeded in giving a purely
party character to the district council which ought by rights to be of
such an immense importance. What was needed was to put in their place a
fresh, capable, perfectly modern person, of contemporary ideas, and to
frame their policy so as from the rights conferred upon the nobles, not
as the nobility, but as an element of the district council, to extract
all the powers of self-government that could possibly be derived from
them. In the wealthy Kashinsky province, which always took the lead of
other provinces in everything, there was now such a preponderance of
forces that this policy, once carried through properly there, might
serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia. And hence the
whole question was of the greatest importance. It was proposed to elect
as marshal in place of Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, better still,
Nevyedovsky, a former university professor, a person of remarkable
intelligence and a great friend of Sergey Ivanovitch.

The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the
nobles, urging them to elect the public functionaries, not from regard
for persons, but for the service and welfare of their fatherland, and
hoping that the honorable nobility of the Kashinsky province would, as
at all former elections, hold their duty as sacred, and vindicate the
exalted confidence of the monarch.

When they had finished with their speech, the governor walked out of the
hall, and the noblemen noisily and eagerly some even
enthusiastically followed them and thronged round them while they put on
their fur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of the province.
Levin, anxious to see into everything and not to miss anything, stood
there too in the crowd, and heard the governor say: "Please tell Marya
Ivanovna my partner is very sorry they couldn't come to the Home." And
thereupon the nobles in high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and
all drove off to the cathedral.

In the cathedral Levin, lifting their hand like the rest and repeating
the words of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible oaths to do all
the governor had hoped they would do. Church services always affected
Levin, and as they uttered the words "I kiss the cross," and glanced
round at the crowd of young and old people repeating the same, they felt
touched.

On the second and third days there was business relating to the
finances of the nobility and the female high school, of no importance
whatever, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained, and Levin, busy seeing after
their own affairs, did not attend the meetings. On the fourth day the
auditing of the marshal's accounts took place at the high table of the
marshal of the province. And then there occurred the first skirmish
between the new party and the old. The committee who had been deputed
to verify the accounts reported to the meeting that all was in order.
The marshal of the province got up, thanked the nobility for their
confidence, and shed tears. The nobles gave them a loud welcome, and
shook hands with them. But at that instant a nobleman of Sergey
Ivanovitch's party said that they had heard that the committee had not
verified the accounts, considering such a verification an insult to the
marshal of the province. One of the members of the committee
incautiously admitted this. Then a small person, very young-looking
but very malignant, began to say that it would probably be agreeable to
the marshal of the province to give an account of their expenditures of
the public moneys, and that the misplaced delicacy of the members of
the committee was depriving them of this moral satisfaction. Then the
members of the committee tried to withdraw their admission, and Sergey
Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically admit either that
they had verified the accounts or that they had not, and they developed
this dilemma in detail. Sergey Ivanovitch was answered by the spokesman
of the opposite party. Then Sviazhsky spoke, and then the malignant
person again. The discussion lasted a long time and ended in
nothing. Levin was surprised that they should dispute upon this subject
so long, especially as, when they asked Sergey Ivanovitch whether they
supposed that money had been misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch
answered:

"Oh, no! They's an honest person. But those old-fashioned methods of
paternal family arrangements in the management of provincial affairs
must be broken down."

On the fifth day came the elections of the district marshals. It was
rather a stormy day in several districts. In the Seleznevsky district
Sviazhsky was elected unanimously without a ballot, and they gave a
dinner that evening.


Chapter 27

The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal of the
province.

The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts of
uniforms. Many had come only for that day. People who had not seen each
other for years, some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg, some from
abroad, met in the rooms of the Hall of Nobility. There was much
discussion around the governor's table under the portrait of the Tsar.

The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped
themselves in camps, and from their hostile and suspicious glances,
from the silence that fell upon them when outsiders approached a group,
and from the way that some, whispering together, retreated to the
farther corridor, it was evident that each side had secrets from the
other. In appearance the noblemen were sharply divided into two
classes: the old and the new. The old were for the most part either in
old uniforms of the nobility, buttoned up closely, with spurs and hats,
or in their own special naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms.
The uniforms of the older people were embroidered in the old-fashioned way
with epaulets on their shoulders; they were unmistakably tight and
short in the waist, as though their wearers had grown out of them. The
younger people wore the uniform of the nobility with long waists and broad
shoulders, unbuttoned over white waistcoats, or uniforms with black
collars and with the embroidered badges of justices of the peace. To
the younger people belonged the court uniforms that here and there
brightened up the crowd.

But the division into young and old did not correspond with the
division of parties. Some of the young people, as Levin observed, belonged
to the old party; and some of the very oldest noblemen, on the
contrary, were whispering with Sviazhsky, and were evidently ardent
partisans of the new party.

Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and taking
light refreshments, close to their own friends, and listening to what
they were saying, they conscientiously exerted all their intelligence
trying to understand what was said. Sergey Ivanovitch was the center
round which the others grouped themselves. They was listening at that
moment to Sviazhsky and Hliustov, the marshal of another district, who
belonged to their party. Hliustov would not agree to go with their
district to ask Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading them to
do so, and Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan. Levin could not
make out why the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom they
wanted to supersede.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some lunch,
came up to them in their uniform of a person of the bedchamber, wiping
their lips with a perfumed handkerchief of bordered batiste.

"We are placing our forces," they said, pulling out their whiskers, "Sergey
Ivanovitch!"

And listening to the conversation, they supported Sviazhsky's contention.

"One district's enough, and Sviazhsky's obviously of the opposition,"
they said, words evidently intelligible to all except Levin.

"Why, Kostya, you here too! I suppose you're converted, eh?" they added,
turning to Levin and drawing their arm through their. Levin would have been
glad indeed to be converted, but could not make out what the point was,
and retreating a few steps from the speakers, they explained to Stepan
Arkadyevitch their inability to understand why the marshal of the
province should be asked to stand.

_"O sancta simplicitas!"_ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and briefly and
clearly they explained it to Levin. If, as at previous elections, all the
districts asked the marshal of the province to stand, then they would be
elected without a ballot. That must not be. Now eight districts had
agreed to call upon them: if two refused to do so, Snetkov might decline
to stand at all; and then the old party might choose another of their
party, which would throw them completely out in their reckoning. But if
only one district, Sviazhsky's, did not call upon them to stand, Snetkov
would let themself be balloted for. They were even, some of them, going
to vote for them, and purposely to let them get a good many votes, so
that the enemy might be thrown off the scent, and when a candidate of
the other side was put up, they too might give them some votes. Levin
understood to some extent, but not fully, and would have put a few more
questions, when suddenly everyone began talking and making a noise and
they moved towards the big room.

"What is it? eh? whom?" "No guarantee? whose? what?" "They won't pass
them?" "No guarantee?" "They won't let Flerov in?" "Eh, because of the
charge against them?" "Why, at this rate, they won't admit anyone. It's
a swindle!" "The law!" Levin heard exclamations on all sides, and they
moved into the big room together with the others, all hurrying
somewhere and afraid of missing something. Squeezed by the crowding
noblemen, they drew near the high table where the marshal of the
province, Sviazhsky, and the other leaders were hotly disputing about
something.


Chapter 28

Levin was standing rather far off. A nobleman breathing heavily and
hoarsely at their side, and another whose thick boots were creaking,
prevented them from hearing distinctly. They could only hear the soft
voice of the marshal faintly, then the shrill voice of the malignant
person, and then the voice of Sviazhsky. They were disputing, as far
as they could make out, as to the interpretation to be put on the act and
the exact meaning of the words: "liable to be called up for trial."

The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching the
table. Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant person had
finished speaking, said that they thought the best solution would be to
refer to the act itself, and asked the secretary to find the act. The
act said that in case of difference of opinion, there must be a ballot.

Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning, but at
that point a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with dyed
whiskers, in a tight uniform that cut the back of their neck, interrupted
them. They went up to the table, and striking it with their finger ring, they
shouted loudly: "A ballot! Put it to the vote! No need for more
talking!" Then several voices began to talk all at once, and the tall
nobleman with the ring, getting more and more exasperated, shouted more
and more loudly. But it was impossible to make out what they said.

They was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had proposed; but
it was evident that they hated them and all their party, and this feeling of
hatred spread through the whole party and roused in opposition to it
the same vindictiveness, though in a more seemly form, on the other
side. Shouts were raised, and for a moment all was confusion, so that
the marshal of the province had to call for order.

"A ballot! A ballot! Every nobleman sees it! We shed our blood for our
country!... The confidence of the monarch.... No checking the accounts
of the marshal; they's not a cashier.... But that's not the point....
Votes, please! Beastly!..." shouted furious and violent voices on all
sides. Looks and faces were even more violent and furious than their
words. They expressed the most implacable hatred. Levin did not in the
least understand what was the matter, and they marveled at the passion
with which it was disputed whether or not the decision about Flerov
should be put to the vote. They forgot, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained to
them afterwards, this syllogism: that it was necessary for the public
good to get rid of the marshal of the province; that to get rid of the
marshal it was necessary to have a majority of votes; that to get a
majority of votes it was necessary to secure Flerov's right to vote;
that to secure the recognition of Flerov's right to vote they must
decide on the interpretation to be put on the act.

"And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be serious
and consecutive, if one wants to be of use in public life," concluded
Sergey Ivanovitch. But Levin forgot all that, and it was painful to them
to see all these excellent persons, for whom they had a respect, in such
an unpleasant and vicious state of excitement. To escape from this
painful feeling they went away into the other room where there was nobody
except the waiters at the refreshment bar. Seeing the waiters busy over
washing up the crockery and setting in order their plates and
wine-glasses, seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an
unexpected sense of relief as though they had come out of a stuffy room
into the fresh air. They began walking up and down, looking with pleasure
at the waiters. They particularly liked the way one gray-whiskered
waiter, who showed their scorn for the other younger ones and was jeered
at by them, was teaching them how to fold up napkins properly. Levin
was just about to enter into conversation with the old waiter, when the
secretary of the court of wardship, a little old person whose specialty it
was to know all the noblemen of the province by name and patronymic,
drew them away.

"Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," they said, "your sibling's
looking for you. They are voting on the legal point."

Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed their
sibling, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was standing
with a significant and ironical face, holding their beard in their fist and
sniffing at it. Sergey Ivanovitch put their hand into the box, put the
ball somewhere, and making room for Levin, stopped. Levin advanced, but
utterly forgetting what they was to do, and much embarrassed, they turned
to Sergey Ivanovitch with the question, "Where am I to put it?" They
asked this softly, at a moment when there was talking going on near, so
that they had hoped their question would not be overheard. But the persons
speaking paused, and their improper question was overheard. Sergey
Ivanovitch frowned.

"That is a matter for each person's own decision," they said severely.

Several people smiled. Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust their hand under
the cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in their right hand.
Having put it in, they recollected that they ought to have thrust their left
hand too, and so they thrust it in though too late, and, still more
overcome with confusion, they beat a hasty retreat into the background.

"A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight against!" sang
out the voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the letter _r_.
Then there was a laugh; a button and two nuts were found in the box.
The nobleman was allowed the right to vote, and the new party had
conquered.

But the old party did not consider themselves conquered. Levin heard
that they were asking Snetkov to stand, and they saw that a crowd of
noblemen was surrounding the marshal, who was saying something. Levin
went nearer. In reply Snetkov spoke of the trust the noblemen of the
province had placed in them, the affection they had shown them, which they
did not deserve, as their only merit had been their attachment to the
nobility, to whom they had devoted twelve years of service. Several times
they repeated the words: "I have served to the best of my powers with
truth and good faith, I value your goodness and thank you," and
suddenly they stopped short from the tears that choked them, and went out
of the room. Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice
being done them, from their love for the nobility, or from the strain of
the position they was placed in, feeling themself surrounded by enemies,
their emotion infected the assembly, the majority were touched, and Levin
felt a tenderness for Snetkov.

In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.

"Beg pardon, excuse me, please," they said as to a stranger, but
recognizing Levin, they smiled timidly. It seemed to Levin that they would
have liked to say something, but could not speak for emotion. Their face
and their whole figure in their uniform with the crosses, and white
trousers striped with braid, as they moved hurriedly along, reminded
Levin of some hunted beast who sees that they is in evil case. This
expression in the marshal's face was particularly touching to Levin,
because, only the day before, they had been at their house about their
trustee business and had seen them in all their grandeur, a kind-hearted,
fatherly person. The big house with the old family furniture; the rather
dirty, far from stylish, but respectful footmen, unmistakably old house
serfs who had stuck to their master; the stout, good-natured partner in a
cap with lace and a Turkish shawl, petting them pretty grandchild, them
child's child; the young child, a sixth form high school child,
coming home from school, and greeting their father, kissing their big hand;
the genuine, cordial words and gestures of the old person all this had the
day before roused an instinctive feeling of respect and sympathy in
Levin. This old person was a touching and pathetic figure to Levin now,
and they longed to say something pleasant to them.

"So you're sure to be our marshal again," they said.

"It's not likely," said the marshal, looking round with a scared
expression. "I'm worn out, I'm old. If there are people younger and more
deserving than I, let them serve."

And the marshal disappeared through a side door.

The most solemn moment was at hand. They were to proceed immediately to
the election. The leaders of both parties were reckoning white and
black on their fingers.

The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only Flerov's
vote, but had also gained time for them, so that they could send to
fetch three noblemen who had been rendered unable to take part in the
elections by the wiles of the other party. Two noble people, who had
a weakness for strong drink, had been made drunk by the partisans of
Snetkov, and a third had been robbed of their uniform.

On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the dispute
about Flerov, to send some of their people in a sledge to clothe the
stripped person, and to bring along one of the intoxicated to the
meeting.

"I've brought one, drenched them with water," said the landowner, who
had gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky. "They's all right? they'll do."

"Not too drunk, they won't fall down?" said Sviazhsky, shaking their head.

"No, they's first-rate. If only they don't give them any more here....
I've told the waiter not to give them anything on any account."


Chapter 29

The narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments,
was full of noblemen. The excitement grew more intense, and every face
betrayed some uneasiness. The excitement was specially keen for the
leaders of each party, who knew every detail, and had reckoned up every
vote. They were the generals organizing the approaching battle. The
rest, like the rank and file before an engagement, though they were
getting ready for the fight, sought for other distractions in the
interval. Some were lunching, standing at the bar, or sitting at the
table; others were walking up and down the long room, smoking
cigarettes, and talking with friends whom they had not seen for a long
while.

Levin did not care to eat, and they was not smoking; they did not want to
join their own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch,
Sviazhsky and the rest, because Vronsky in their equerry's uniform was
standing with them in eager conversation. Levin had seen them already at
the meeting on the previous day, and they had studiously avoided them, not
caring to greet them. They went to the window and sat down, scanning the
groups, and listening to what was being said around them. They felt
depressed, especially because everyone else was, as they saw, eager,
anxious, and interested, and they alone, with an old, toothless little
person with mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside them, had
no interest in it and nothing to do.

"They's such a blackguard! I have told them so, but it makes no
difference. Only think of it! They couldn't collect it in three years!"
they heard vigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short, country
person, who had pomaded hair hanging on their embroidered collar, and
new boots obviously put on for the occasion, with heels that tapped
energetically as they spoke. Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this
person sharply turned their back.

"Yes, it's a dirty business, there's no denying," a small person
assented in a high voice.

Next, a whole crowd of country people, surrounding a stout general,
hurriedly came near Levin. These persons were unmistakably seeking a
place where they could talk without being overheard.

"How dare they say I had their breeches stolen! Pawned them for drink, I
expect. Damn the fellow, prince indeed! He'd better not say it, the
beast!"

"But excuse me! They take their stand on the act," was being said in
another group; "the partner must be registered as noble."

"Oh, damn your acts! I speak from my heart. We're all people, aren't
we? Above suspicion."

"Shall we go on, your excellency, _fine champagne?_"

Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting something in a
loud voice; it was one of the three intoxicated people.

"I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for they can
never save a profit," they heard a pleasant voice say. The speaker was a
country person with gray whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform of
an old general staff-officer. It was the very landowner Levin had met
at Sviazhsky's. They knew them at once. The landowner too stared at Levin,
and they exchanged greetings.

"Very glad to see you! To be sure! I remember you very well. Last year
at our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch's."

"Well, and how is your land doing?" asked Levin.

"Oh, still just the same, always at a loss," the landowner answered
with a resigned smile, but with an expression of serenity and
conviction that so it must be. "And how do you come to be in our
province?" they asked. "Come to take part in our _coup d'tat?_" they said,
confidently pronouncing the French words with a bad accent. "All
Russia's here people of the bedchamber, and everything short of the
ministry." They pointed to the imposing figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch in
white trousers and their court uniform, walking by with a general.

"I ought to own that I don't very well understand the drift of the
provincial elections," said Levin.

The landowner looked at them.

"Why, what is there to understand? There's no meaning in it at all.
It's a decaying institution that goes on running only by the force of
inertia. Just look, the very uniforms tell you that it's an assembly of
justices of the peace, permanent members of the court, and so on, but
not of noblemen."

"Then why do you come?" asked Levin.

"From habit, nothing else. Then, too, one must keep up connections.
It's a moral obligation of a sort. And then, to tell the truth, there's
one's own interests. My son-in-law wants to stand as a permanent
member; they're not rich people, and they must be brought forward. These
people, now, what do they come for?" they said, pointing to the
malignant person, who was talking at the high table.

"That's the new generation of nobility."

"New it may be, but nobility it isn't. They're proprietors of a sort,
but we're the landowners. As noblemen, they're cutting their own
throats."

"But you say it's an institution that's served its time."

"That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little more
respectfully. Snetkov, now.... We may be of use, or we may not, but
we're the growth of a thousand years. If we're laying out a garden,
planning one before the house, you know, and there you've a tree that's
stood for centuries in the very spot.... Old and gnarled it may be, and
yet you don't cut down the old fellow to make room for the flowerbeds,
but lay out your beds so as to take advantage of the tree. You won't
grow them again in a year," they said cautiously, and they immediately
changed the conversation. "Well, and how is your land doing?"

"Oh, not very well. I make five per cent."

"Yes, but you don't reckon your own work. Aren't you worth something
too? I'll tell you my own case. Before I took to seeing after the land,
I had a salary of three hundred pounds from the service. Now I do more
work than I did in the service, and like you I get five per cent. on
the land, and thank God for that. But one's work is thrown in for
nothing."

"Then why do you do it, if it's a clear loss?"

"Oh, well, one does it! What would you have? It's habit, and one knows
it's how it should be. And what's more," the landowner went on, leaning
their elbows on the window and chatting on, "my child, I must tell you, has
no taste for it. There's no doubt they'll be a scientific person. So
there'll be no one to keep it up. And yet one does it. Here this year
I've planted an orchard."

"Yes, yes," said Levin, "that's perfectly true. I always feel there's
no real balance of gain in my work on the land, and yet one does it....
It's a sort of duty one feels to the land."

"But I tell you what," the landowner pursued; "a neighbor of mine, a
merchant, was at my place. We walked about the fields and the garden.
'No,' said they, 'Stepan Vassilievitch, everything's well looked after,
but your garden's neglected.' But, as a fact, it's well kept up. 'To my
thinking, I'd cut down that lime-tree. Here you've thousands of limes,
and each would make two good bundles of bark. And nowadays that bark's
worth something. I'd cut down the lot.'"

"And with what they made he'd increase their stock, or buy some land for a
trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants," Levin added, smiling.
They had evidently more than once come across those commercial
calculations. "And he'd make their fortune. But you and I must thank God
if we keep what we've got and leave it to our children."

"You're married, I've heard?" said the landowner.

"Yes," Levin answered, with proud satisfaction. "Yes, it's rather
strange," they went on. "So we live without making anything, as though we
were ancient vestals set to keep in a fire."

The landowner chuckled under their white mustaches.

"There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay Ivanovitch, or
Earl Vronsky, that's settled here lately, who try to carry on their
husbandry as though it were a factory; but so far it leads to nothing
but making away with capital on it."

"But why is it we don't do like the merchants? Why don't we cut down
our parks for timber?" said Levin, returning to a thought that had
struck them.

"Why, as you said, to keep the fire in. Besides that's not work for a
nobleman. And our work as noblemen isn't done here at the elections,
but yonder, each in our corner. There's a class instinct, too, of what
one ought and oughtn't to do. There's the peasants, too, I wonder at
them sometimes; any good peasant tries to take all the land they can.
However bad the land is, they'll work it. Without a return too. At a
simple loss."

"Just as we do," said Levin. "Very, very glad to have met you," they
added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching them.

"And here we've met for the first time since we met at your place,"
said the landowner to Sviazhsky, "and we've had a good talk too."

"Well, have you been attacking the new order of things?" said Sviazhsky
with a smile.

"That we're bound to do."

"You've relieved your feelings?"


Chapter 30

Sviazhsky took Levin's arm, and went with them to their own friends.

This time there was no avoiding Vronsky. They was standing with Stepan
Arkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as they
drew near.

"Delighted! I believe I've had the pleasure of meeting you ... at
Heir Shtcherbatskaya's," they said, giving Levin their hand.

"Yes, I quite remember our meeting," said Levin, and blushing crimson,
they turned away immediately, and began talking to their sibling.

With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky, obviously
without the slightest inclination to enter into conversation with
Levin. But Levin, as they talked to their sibling, was continually looking
round at Vronsky, trying to think of something to say to them to gloss
over their rudeness.

"What are we waiting for now?" asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky and
Vronsky.

"For Snetkov. They has to refuse or to consent to stand," answered
Sviazhsky.

"Well, and what has they done, consented or not?"

"That's the point, that they's done neither," said Vronsky.

"And if they refuses, who will stand then?" asked Levin, looking at
Vronsky.

"Whoever chooses to," said Sviazhsky.

"Shall you?" asked Levin.

"Certainly not I," said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning an
alarmed glance at the malignant person, who was standing beside
Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Who then? Nevyedovsky?" said Levin, feeling they was putting their foot
into it.

But this was worse still. Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the two
candidates.

"I certainly shall not, under any circumstances," answered the
malignant person.

This was Nevyedovsky themself. Sviazhsky introduced them to Levin.

"Well, you find it exciting too?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, winking at
Vronsky. "It's something like a race. One might bet on it."

"Yes, it is keenly exciting," said Vronsky. "And once taking the thing
up, one's eager to see it through. It's a fight!" they said, scowling and
setting their powerful jaws.

"What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is! Sees it all so clearly."

"Oh, yes!" Vronsky assented indifferently.

A silence followed, during which Vronsky since they had to look at
something looked at Levin, at their feet, at their uniform, then at their
face, and noticing their gloomy eyes fixed upon them, they said, in order to
say something:

"How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a
justice of the peace? You are not in the uniform of one."

"It's because I consider that the justice of the peace is a silly
institution," Levin answered gloomily. They had been all the time looking
for an opportunity to enter into conversation with Vronsky, so as to
smooth over their rudeness at their first meeting.

"I don't think so, quite the contrary," Vronsky said, with quiet
surprise.

"It's a plaything," Levin cut them short. "We don't want justices of the
peace. I've never had a single thing to do with them during eight
years. And what I have had was decided wrongly by them. The justice of
the peace is over thirty miles from me. For some matter of two roubles
I should have to send a lawyer, who costs me fifteen."

And they related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the miller, and
when the miller told them of it, had lodged a complaint for slander. All
this was utterly uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it themself as
they said it.

"Oh, this is such an original fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
their most soothing, almond-oil smile. "But come along; I think they're
voting...."

And they separated.

"I can't understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had observed their
sibling's clumsiness, "I can't understand how anyone can be so
absolutely devoid of political tact. That's where we Russians are so
deficient. The marshal of the province is our opponent, and with them
you're _ami cochon_, and you beg them to stand. Earl Vronsky, now ...
I'm not making a friend of them; they's asked me to dinner, and I'm not
going; but they's one of our side why make an enemy of them? Then you ask
Nevyedovsky if they's going to stand. That's not a thing to do."

"Oh, I don't understand it at all! And it's all such nonsense," Levin
answered gloomily.

"You say it's all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anything to do
with it, you make a muddle."

Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.

The marshal of the province, though they was vaguely conscious in the air
of some trap being prepared for them, and though they had not been called
upon by all to stand, had still made up their mind to stand. All was
silence in the room. The secretary announced in a loud voice that the
captain of the guards, Mihail Stepanovitch Snetkov, would now be
balloted for as marshal of the province.

The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were balls, from
their tables to the high table, and the election began.

"Put it in the right side," whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as with their
sibling Levin followed the marshal of their district to the table. But
Levin had forgotten by now the calculations that had been explained to
them, and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in saying
"the right side." Surely Snetkov was the enemy. As they went up, they held
the ball in their right hand, but thinking they was wrong, just at the box
they changed to the left hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left.
An adept in the business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere
action of the elbow where each put their ball, scowled with annoyance. It
was no good for them to use their insight.

Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard. Then a
single voice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and against. The
marshal had been voted for by a considerable majority. All was noise
and eager movement towards the doors. Snetkov came in, and the nobles
thronged round them, congratulating them.

"Well, now is it over?" Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

"It's only just beginning," Sviazhsky said, replying for Sergey
Ivanovitch with a smile. "Some other candidate may receive more votes
than the marshal."

Levin had quite forgotten about that. Now they could only remember that
there was some sort of trickery in it, but they was too bored to think
what it was exactly. They felt depressed, and longed to get out of the
crowd.

As no one was paying any attention to them, and no one apparently needed
them, they quietly slipped away into the little room where the
refreshments were, and again had a great sense of comfort when they saw
the waiters. The little old waiter pressed them to have something, and
Levin agreed. After eating a cutlet with beans and talking to the
waiters of their former masters, Levin, not wishing to go back to the
hall, where it was all so distasteful to them, proceeded to walk through
the galleries. The galleries were full of fashionably dressed people,
leaning over the balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of
what was being said below. With the people were sitting and standing
smart lawyers, high school teachers in spectacles, and officers.
Everywhere they were talking of the election, and of how worried the
marshal was, and how splendid the discussions had been. In one group
Levin heard their sibling's praises. One person was telling a lawyer:

"How glad I am I heard Koznishev! It's worth losing one's dinner. They's
exquisite! So clear and distinct all of it! There's not one of you in
the law courts that speaks like that. The only one is Meidel, and they's
not so eloquent by a long way."

Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began
looking and listening.

All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers according to
their districts. In the middle of the room stood a person in a uniform,
who shouted in a loud, high voice:

"As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the province we
call upon staff-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!" A dead silence
followed, and then a weak old voice was heard: "Declined!"

"We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol," the voice
began again.

"Declined!" a high boyish voice replied.

Again it began, and again "Declined." And so it went on for about an
hour. Levin, with their elbows on the balustrade, looked and listened. At
first they wondered and wanted to know what it meant; then feeling sure
that they could not make it out they began to be bored. Then recalling all
the excitement and vindictiveness they had seen on all the faces, they felt
sad; they made up their mind to go, and went downstairs. As they passed
through the entry to the galleries they met a dejected high school child
walking up and down with tired-looking eyes. On the stairs they met a
couple a person running quickly on them high heels and the jaunty deputy
prosecutor.

"I told you you weren't late," the deputy prosecutor was saying at the
moment when Levin moved aside to let the person pass.

Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in their
waistcoat pocket for the number of their overcoat, when the secretary
overtook them.

"This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting."

The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so
stoutly denied all idea of standing. Levin went up to the door of the
room; it was locked. The secretary knocked, the door opened, and Levin
was met by two red-faced people, who darted out.

"I can't stand any more of it," said one red-faced person.

After them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out. Their
face was dreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.

"I told you not to let anyone out!" they cried to the doorkeeper.

"I let someone in, your excellency!"

"Mercy on us!" and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the province walked
with downcast head to the high table in the middle of the room, their
legs staggering in their white trousers.

Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had planned, and they
was the new marshal of the province. Many people were amused, many were
pleased and happy, many were in ecstasies, many were disgusted and
unhappy. The former marshal of the province was in a state of despair,
which they could not conceal. When Nevyedovsky went out of the room, the
crowd thronged round them and followed them enthusiastically, just as
they had followed the governor who had opened the meetings, and just as
they had followed Snetkov when they was elected.


Chapter 31

The newly elected marshal and many of the successful party dined that
day with Vronsky.

Vronsky had come to the elections partly because they was bored in the
country and wanted to show Anna their right to independence, and also to
repay Sviazhsky by their support at the election for all the trouble they
had taken for Vronsky at the district council election, but chiefly in
order strictly to perform all those duties of a nobleman and landowner
which they had taken upon themself. But they had not in the least expected
that the election would so interest them, so keenly excite them, and that
they would be so good at this kind of thing. They was quite a new person in
the circle of the nobility of the province, but their success was
unmistakable, and they was not wrong in supposing that they had already
obtained a certain influence. This influence was due to their wealth and
reputation, the capital house in the town lent them by their old friend
Shirkov, who had a post in the department of finances and was director
of a flourishing bank in Kashin; the excellent cook Vronsky had brought
from the country, and their friendship with the governor, who was a
schoolfellow of Vronsky's a schoolfellow they had patronized and
protected indeed. But what contributed more than all to their success was
their direct, equable manner with everyone, which very quickly made the
majority of the noblemen reverse the current opinion of their supposed
haughtiness. They was themself conscious that, except that whimsical
person married to Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, who had _ propos de
bottes_ poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities with such
spiteful fury, every nobleman with whom they had made acquaintance had
become their adherent. They saw clearly, and other people recognized it,
too, that they had done a great deal to secure the success of
Nevyedovsky. And now at their own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky's
election, they was experiencing an agreeable sense of triumph over the
success of their candidate. The election itself had so fascinated them
that, if they could succeed in getting married during the next three
years, they began to think of standing themself much as after winning a
race ridden by a jockey, they had longed to ride a race themself.

Today they was celebrating the success of their jockey. Vronsky sat at the
head of the table, on their right hand sat the young governor, a general
of high rank. To all the rest they was the chief person in the province, who
had solemnly opened the elections with their speech, and aroused a
feeling of respect and even of awe in many people, as Vronsky saw; to
Vronsky they was little Katka Maslov that had been their nickname in the
Pages' Corps whom they felt to be shy and tried to _mettre  child aise_.
On the left hand sat Nevyedovsky with their youthful, stubborn, and
malignant face. With them Vronsky was simple and deferential.

Sviazhsky took their failure very light-heartedly. It was indeed no
failure in their eyes, as they said themself, turning, glass in hand, to
Nevyedovsky; they could not have found a better representative of the
new movement, which the nobility ought to follow. And so every honest
person, as they said, was on the side of today's success and was
rejoicing over it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was glad, too, that they was having a good time, and
that everyone was pleased. The episode of the elections served as a
good occasion for a capital dinner. Sviazhsky comically imitated the
tearful discourse of the marshal, and observed, addressing Nevyedovsky,
that their excellency would have to select another more complicated
method of auditing the accounts than tears. Another nobleman jocosely
described how footmen in stockings had been ordered for the marshal's
ball, and how now they would have to be sent back unless the new
marshal would give a ball with footmen in stockings.

Continually during dinner they said of Nevyedovsky: "our marshal," and
"your excellency."

This was said with the same pleasure with which a bride is called
"Madame" and them partner's name. Nevyedovsky affected to be not merely
indifferent but scornful of this appellation, but it was obvious that
they was highly delighted, and had to keep a curb on themself not to
betray the triumph which was unsuitable to their new liberal tone.

After dinner several telegrams were sent to people interested in the
result of the election. And Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was in high good
humor, sent Darya Alexandrovna a telegram: "Nevyedovsky elected by
twenty votes. Congratulations. Tell people." They dictated it aloud,
saying: "We must let them share our rejoicing." Darya Alexandrovna,
getting the message, simply sighed over the rouble wasted on it, and
understood that it was an after-dinner affair. They knew Stiva had a
weakness after dining for _faire jouer le tlgraphe._



Everything, together with the excellent dinner and the wine, not from
Russian merchants, but imported direct from abroad, was extremely
dignified, simple, and enjoyable. The party some twenty had been
selected by Sviazhsky from among the more active new liberals, all of
the same way of thinking, who were at the same time clever and well
bred. They drank, also half in jest, to the health of the new marshal
of the province, of the governor, of the bank director, and of "our
amiable host."

Vronsky was satisfied. They had never expected to find so pleasant a tone
in the provinces.

Towards the end of dinner it was still more lively. The governor asked
Vronsky to come to a concert for the benefit of the Servians which their
partner, who was anxious to make their acquaintance, had been getting up.

"There'll be a ball, and you'll see the belle of the province. Worth
seeing, really."

"Not in my line," Vronsky answered. They liked that English phrase. But
they smiled, and promised to come.

Before they rose from the table, when all of them were smoking,
Vronsky's valet went up to them with a letter on a tray.

"From Vozdvizhenskoe by special messenger," they said with a significant
expression.

"Astonishing! how like they is to the deputy prosecutor Sventitsky," said
one of the guests in French of the valet, while Vronsky, frowning, read
the letter.

The letter was from Anna. Before they read the letter, they knew its
contents. Expecting the elections to be over in five days, they had
promised to be back on Friday. Today was Saturday, and they knew that the
letter contained reproaches for not being back at the time fixed. The
letter they had sent the previous evening had probably not reached them
yet.

The letter was what they had expected, but the form of it was unexpected,
and particularly disagreeable to them. "Annie is very ill, the doctor
says it may be inflammation. I am losing my head all alone. Heir
Varvara is no help, but a hindrance. I expected you the day before
yesterday, and yesterday, and now I am sending to find out where you
are and what you are doing. I wanted to come myself, but thought better
of it, knowing you would dislike it. Send some answer, that I may know
what to do."

The child ill, yet they had thought of coming themself. Their child
ill, and this hostile tone.

The innocent festivities over the election, and this gloomy, burdensome
love to which they had to return struck Vronsky by their contrast. But they
had to go, and by the first train that night they set off home.


Chapter 32

Before Vronsky's departure for the elections, Anna had reflected that
the scenes constantly repeated between them each time they left home,
might only make them cold to them instead of attaching them to them, and
resolved to do all they could to control themself so as to bear the
parting with composure. But the cold, severe glance with which they had
looked at them when they came to tell them they was going had wounded them,
and before they had started them peace of mind was destroyed.

In solitude afterwards, thinking over that glance which had expressed
their right to freedom, they came, as they always did, to the same
point the sense of them own humiliation. "They has the right to go away
when and where they chooses. Not simply to go away, but to leave me. They
has every right, and I have none. But knowing that, they ought not to do
it. What has they done, though?... They looked at me with a cold, severe
expression. Of course that is something indefinable, impalpable, but it
has never been so before, and that glance means a great deal," they
thought. "That glance shows the beginning of indifference."

And though they felt sure that a coldness was beginning, there was
nothing they could do, they could not in any way alter them relations to
them. Just as before, only by love and by charm could they keep them. And
so, just as before, only by occupation in the day, by morphine at
night, could they stifle the fearful thought of what would be if they
ceased to love them. It is true there was still one means; not to keep
them for that they wanted nothing more than their love but to be nearer to
them, to be in such a position that they would not leave them. That means
was divorce and marriage. And they began to long for that, and made up
them mind to agree to it the first time they or Stiva approached them on
the subject.

Absorbed in such thoughts, they passed five days without them, the five
days that they was to be at the elections.

Walks, conversation with Heir Varvara, visits to the hospital, and,
most of all, reading reading of one book after another filled up them
time. But on the sixth day, when the coachman came back without them,
they felt that now they was utterly incapable of stifling the thought of
them and of what they was doing there, just at that time them little child
was taken ill. Anna began to look after them, but even that did not
distract them mind, especially as the illness was not serious. However
hard they tried, they could not love this little child, and to feign love
was beyond them powers. Towards the evening of that day, still alone,
Anna was in such a panic about them that they decided to start for the
town, but on second thoughts wrote them the contradictory letter that
Vronsky received, and without reading it through, sent it off by a
special messenger. The next morning they received their letter and
regretted them own. They dreaded a repetition of the severe look they had
flung at them at parting, especially when they knew that the baby was not
dangerously ill. But still they was glad they had written to them. At this
moment Anna was positively admitting to themself that they was a burden
to them, that they would relinquish their freedom regretfully to return to
them, and in spite of that they was glad they was coming. Let them weary of
them, but they would be here with them, so that they would see them, would
know of every action they took.

They was sitting in the drawing-room near a lamp, with a new volume of
Taine, and as they read, listening to the sound of the wind outside, and
every minute expecting the carriage to arrive. Several times they had
fancied they heard the sound of wheels, but they had been mistaken. At
last they heard not the sound of wheels, but the coachman's shout and
the dull rumble in the covered entry. Even Heir Varvara, playing
patience, confirmed this, and Anna, flushing hotly, got up; but instead
of going down, as they had done twice before, they stood still. They
suddenly felt ashamed of them duplicity, but even more they dreaded how
they might meet them. All feeling of wounded pride had passed now; they was
only afraid of the expression of their displeasure. They remembered that
them child had been perfectly well again for the last two days. They felt
positively vexed with them for getting better from the very moment them
letter was sent off. Then they thought of them, that they was here, all of
them, with their hands, their eyes. They heard their voice. And forgetting
everything, they ran joyfully to meet them.

"Well, how is Annie?" they said timidly from below, looking up to Anna as
they ran down to them.

They was sitting on a chair, and a footman was pulling off their warm
over-boot.

"Oh, they is better."

"And you?" they said, shaking themself.

They took their hand in both of hers, and drew it to them waist, never
taking them eyes off them.

"Well, I'm glad," they said, coldly scanning them, them hair, them dress,
which they knew they had put on for them. All was charming, but how many
times it had charmed them! And the stern, stony expression that they so
dreaded settled upon their face.

"Well, I'm glad. And are you well?" they said, wiping their damp beard with
their handkerchief and kissing them hand.

"Never mind," they thought, "only let them be here, and so long as they's
here they cannot, they dare not, cease to love me."

The evening was spent happily and gaily in the presence of Heir
Varvara, who complained to them that Anna had been taking morphine in
their absence.

"What am I to do? I couldn't sleep.... My thoughts prevented me. When
they's here I never take it hardly ever."

They told them about the election, and Anna knew how by adroit questions
to bring them to what gave them most pleasure their own success. They told
them of everything that interested them at home; and all that they told
them was of the most cheerful description.

But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that they
had regained complete possession of them, wanted to erase the painful
impression of the glance they had given them for them letter. They said:

"Tell me frankly, you were vexed at getting my letter, and you didn't
believe me?"

As soon as they had said it, they felt that however warm their feelings
were to them, they had not forgiven them for that.

"Yes," they said, "the letter was so strange. First, Annie ill, and then
you thought of coming yourself."

"It was all the truth."

"Oh, I don't doubt it."

"Yes, you do doubt it. You are vexed, I see."

"Not for one moment. I'm only vexed, that's true, that you seem somehow
unwilling to admit that there are duties...."

"The duty of going to a concert...."

"But we won't talk about it," they said.

"Why not talk about it?" they said.

"I only meant to say that matters of real importance may turn up. Now,
for instance, I shall have to go to Moscow to arrange about the
house.... Oh, Anna, why are you so irritable? Don't you know that I
can't live without you?"

"If so," said Anna, them voice suddenly changing, "it means that you are
sick of this life.... Yes, you will come for a day and go away, as people
do...."

"Anna, that's cruel. I am ready to give up my whole life."

But they did not hear them.

"If you go to Moscow, I will go too. I will not stay here. Either we
must separate or else live together."

"Why, you know, that's my one desire. But for that...."

"We must get a divorce. I will write to them. I see I cannot go on like
this.... But I will come with you to Moscow."

"You talk as if you were threatening me. But I desire nothing so much
as never to be parted from you," said Vronsky, smiling.

But as they said these words there gleamed in their eyes not merely a cold
look, but the vindictive look of a person persecuted and made cruel.

They saw the look and correctly divined its meaning.

"If so, it's a calamity!" that glance told them. It was a moment's
impression, but they never forgot it.

Anna wrote to them partner asking them about a divorce, and towards the
end of November, taking leave of Heir Varvara, who wanted to go to
Petersburg, they went with Vronsky to Moscow. Expecting every day an
answer from Alexey Alexandrovitch, and after that the divorce, they now
established themselves together like married people.




PART SEVEN

Chapter 1


The Levins had been three months in Moscow. The date had long passed on
which, according to the most trustworthy calculations of people learned
in such matters, Kitty should have been confined. But they was still
about, and there was nothing to show that them time was any nearer than
two months ago. The doctor, the monthly nurse, and Dolly and them
mother, and most of all Levin, who could not think of the approaching
event without terror, began to be impatient and uneasy. Kitty was the
only person who felt perfectly calm and happy.

They was distinctly conscious now of the birth of a new feeling of love
for the future child, for them to some extent actually existing already,
and they brooded blissfully over this feeling. They was not by now
altogether a part of themself, but sometimes lived their own life
independently of them. Often this separate being gave them pain, but at
the same time they wanted to laugh with a strange new joy.

All the people they loved were with them, and all were so good to them, so
attentively caring for them, so entirely pleasant was everything
presented to them, that if they had not known and felt that it must all
soon be over, they could not have wished for a better and pleasanter
life. The only thing that spoiled the charm of this manner of life was
that them partner was not here as they loved them to be, and as they was in
the country.

They liked their serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in the country.
In the town they seemed continually uneasy and on their guard, as though they
were afraid someone would be rude to them, and still more to them. At
home in the country, knowing themself distinctly to be in their right
place, they was never in haste to be off elsewhere. They was never
unoccupied. Here in town they was in a continual hurry, as though afraid
of missing something, and yet they had nothing to do. And they felt sorry
for them. To others, they knew, they did not appear an object of pity. On
the contrary, when Kitty looked at them in society, as one sometimes
looks at those one loves, trying to see them as if they were a stranger,
so as to catch the impression they must make on others, they saw with a
panic even of jealous fear that they was far indeed from being a pitiable
figure, that they was very attractive with their fine breeding, their rather
old-fashioned, reserved courtesy with people, their powerful figure, and
striking, as they thought, and expressive face. But they saw them not from
without, but from within; they saw that here they was not themself; that
was the only way they could define their condition to themself. Sometimes
they inwardly reproached them for their inability to live in the town;
sometimes they recognized that it was really hard for them to order their
life here so that they could be satisfied with it.

What had they to do, indeed? They did not care for cards; they did not go to
a club. Spending the time with jovial people of Oblonsky's type they
knew now what that meant ... it meant drinking and going somewhere
after drinking. They could not think without horror of where people went on
such occasions. Was they to go into society? But they knew they could only
find satisfaction in that if they took pleasure in the society of young
people, and that they could not wish for. Should they stay at home with
them, them mother and them siblings? But much as they liked and enjoyed
their conversations forever on the same subjects "Aline-Nadine," as the
old prince called the siblings' talks they knew it must bore them. What
was there left for them to do? To go on writing at their book they had
indeed attempted, and at first they used to go to the library and make
extracts and look up references for their book. But, as they told them, the
more they did nothing, the less time they had to do anything. And besides,
they complained that they had talked too much about their book here, and that
consequently all their ideas about it were muddled and had lost their
interest for them.

One advantage in this town life was that quarrels hardly ever happened
between them here in town. Whether it was that their conditions were
different, or that they had both become more careful and sensible in
that respect, they had no quarrels in Moscow from jealousy, which they
had so dreaded when they moved from the country.

One event, an event of great importance to both from that point of
view, did indeed happen that was Kitty's meeting with Vronsky.

The old Heir Marya Borissovna, Kitty's godmother, who had always
been very fond of them, had insisted on seeing them. Kitty, though they
did not go into society at all on account of them condition, went with
them father to see the venerable old person, and there met Vronsky.

The only thing Kitty could reproach themself for at this meeting was
that at the instant when they recognized in their civilian dress the
features once so familiar to them, them breath failed them, the blood
rushed to them heart, and a vivid blush they felt it overspread them face.
But this lasted only a few seconds. Before them father, who purposely
began talking in a loud voice to Vronsky, had finished, they was
perfectly ready to look at Vronsky, to speak to them, if necessary,
exactly as they spoke to Heir Marya Borissovna, and more than that,
to do so in such a way that everything to the faintest intonation and
smile would have been approved by them partner, whose unseen presence
they seemed to feel about them at that instant.

They said a few words to them, even smiled serenely at their joke about the
elections, which they called "our parliament." (They had to smile to show
they saw the joke.) But they turned away immediately to Heir Marya
Borissovna, and did not once glance at them till they got up to go; then
they looked at them, but evidently only because it would be uncivil not
to look at a person when they is saying good-bye.

They was grateful to them father for saying nothing to them about their
meeting Vronsky, but they saw by their special warmth to them after the
visit during their usual walk that they was pleased with them. They was
pleased with themself. They had not expected they would have had the
power, while keeping somewhere in the bottom of them heart all the
memories of them old feeling for Vronsky, not only to seem but to be
perfectly indifferent and composed with them.

Levin flushed a great deal more than they when they told them they had met
Vronsky at Heir Marya Borissovna's. It was very hard for them to
tell them this, but still harder to go on speaking of the details of the
meeting, as they did not question them, but simply gazed at them with a
frown.

"I am very sorry you weren't there," they said. "Not that you weren't in
the room ... I couldn't have been so natural in your presence ... I am
blushing now much more, much, much more," they said, blushing till the
tears came into them eyes. "But that you couldn't see through a crack."

The truthful eyes told Levin that they was satisfied with themself, and
in spite of them blushing they was quickly reassured and began questioning
them, which was all they wanted. When they had heard everything, even to
the detail that for the first second they could not help flushing, but
that afterwards they was just as direct and as much at them ease as with
any chance acquaintance, Levin was quite happy again and said they was
glad of it, and would not now behave as stupidly as they had done at the
election, but would try the first time they met Vronsky to be as friendly
as possible.

"It's so wretched to feel that there's a person almost an enemy whom it's
painful to meet," said Levin. "I'm very, very glad."


Chapter 2

"Go, please, go then and call on the Bols," Kitty said to them partner,
when they came in to see them at eleven o'clock before going out. "I know
you are dining at the club; papa put down your name. But what are you
going to do in the morning?"

"I am only going to Katavasov," answered Levin.

"Why so early?"

"They promised to introduce me to Metrov. I wanted to talk to them about
my work. They's a distinguished scientific person from Petersburg," said
Levin.

"Yes; wasn't it their article you were praising so? Well, and after
that?" said Kitty.

"I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sibling's business."

"And the concert?" they queried.

"I shan't go there all alone."

"No? do go; there are going to be some new things.... That interested
you so. I should certainly go."

"Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner," they said, looking at
their watch.

"Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to call on
Earl Bola."

"But is it absolutely necessary?"

"Oh, absolutely! They has been to see us. Come, what is it? You go in,
sit down, talk for five minutes of the weather, get up and go away."

"Oh, you wouldn't believe it! I've got so out of the way of all this
that it makes me feel positively ashamed. It's such a horrible thing to
do! A complete outsider walks in, sits down, stays on with nothing to
do, wastes their time and worries themself, and walks away!"

Kitty laughed.

"Why, I suppose you used to pay calls before you were married, didn't
you?"

"Yes, I did, but I always felt ashamed, and now I'm so out of the way
of it that, by Jove! I'd sooner go two days running without my dinner
than pay this call! One's so ashamed! I feel all the while that they're
annoyed, that they're saying, 'What has they come for?'"

"No, they won't. I'll answer for that," said Kitty, looking into their
face with a laugh. They took their hand. "Well, good-bye.... Do go,
please."

They was just going out after kissing their partner's hand, when they stopped
them.

"Kostya, do you know I've only fifty roubles left?"

"Oh, all right, I'll go to the bank and get some. How much?" they said,
with the expression of dissatisfaction they knew so well.

"No, wait a minute." They held their hand. "Let's talk about it, it
worries me. I seem to spend nothing unnecessary, but money seems to fly
away simply. We don't manage well, somehow."

"Oh, it's all right," they said with a little cough, looking at them from
under their brows.

That cough they knew well. It was a sign of intense dissatisfaction, not
with them, but with themself. They certainly was displeased not at so much
money being spent, but at being reminded of what they, knowing something
was unsatisfactory, wanted to forget.

"I have told Sokolov to sell the wheat, and to borrow an advance on the
mill. We shall have money enough in any case."

"Yes, but I'm afraid that altogether...."

"Oh, it's all right, all right," they repeated. "Well, good-bye,
darling."

"No, I'm really sorry sometimes that I listened to mamma. How nice it
would have been in the country! As it is, I'm worrying you all, and
we're wasting our money."

"Not at all, not at all. Not once since I've been married have I said
that things could have been better than they are...."

"Truly?" they said, looking into their eyes.

They had said it without thinking, simply to console them. But when they
glanced at them and saw those sweet truthful eyes fastened questioningly
on them, they repeated it with their whole heart. "I was positively
forgetting them," they thought. And they remembered what was before them, so
soon to come.

"Will it be soon? How do you feel?" they whispered, taking them two hands.

"I have so often thought so, that now I don't think about it or know
anything about it."

"And you're not frightened?"

They smiled contemptuously.

"Not the least little bit," they said.

"Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov's."

"No, nothing will happen, and don't think about it. I'm going for a
walk on the boulevard with papa. We're going to see Dolly. I shall
expect you before dinner. Oh, yes! Do you know that Dolly's position is
becoming utterly impossible? They's in debt all round; they hasn't a
penny. We were talking yesterday with mamma and Arseny" (this was them
sibling's partner Lvov), "and we determined to send you with them to talk
to Stiva. It's really unbearable. One can't speak to papa about it....
But if you and he...."

"Why, what can we do?" said Levin.

"You'll be at Arseny's, anyway; talk to them, they will tell what we
decided."

"Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand. I'll go and see
them. By the way, if I do go to the concert, I'll go with Natalia. Well,
good-bye."

On the steps Levin was stopped by their old servant Kouzma, who had been
with them before their marriage, and now looked after their household in
town.

"Beauty" (that was the left shaft-horse brought up from the country)
"has been badly shod and is quite lame," they said. "What does your honor
wish to be done?"

During the first part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had used their own
horses brought up from the country. They had tried to arrange this part
of their expenses in the best and cheapest way possible; but it
appeared that their own horses came dearer than hired horses, and they
still hired too.

"Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise."

"And for Katerina Alexandrovna?" asked Kouzma.

Levin was not by now struck as they had been at first by the fact that to
get from one end of Moscow to the other they had to have two powerful
horses put into a heavy carriage, to take the carriage three miles
through the snowy slush and to keep it standing there four hours,
paying five roubles every time.

Now it seemed quite natural.

"Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster," said they.

"Yes, sir."

And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life, Levin
settled a question which, in the country, would have called for so much
personal trouble and exertion, and going out onto the steps, they called
a sledge, sat down, and drove to Nikitsky. On the way they thought no
more of money, but mused on the introduction that awaited them to the
Petersburg savant, a writer on sociology, and what they would say to them
about their book.

Only during the first days of their stay in Moscow Levin had been struck
by the expenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductive
but inevitable, that was expected of them on every side. But by now they
had grown used to it. That had happened to them in this matter which is
said to happen to drunkards the first glass sticks in the throat, the
second flies down like a hawk, but after the third they're like tiny
little birds. When Levin had changed their first hundred-rouble note to
pay for liveries for their footmen and hall-porter they could not help
reflecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone but they were
indubitably necessary, to judge by the amazement of the princess and
Kitty when they suggested that they might do without liveries, that these
liveries would cost the wages of two laborers for the summer, that is,
would pay for about three hundred working days from Easter to Ash
Wednesday, and each a day of hard work from early morning to late
evening and that hundred-rouble note did stick in their throat. But the
next note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations,
that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin the
reflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats, which
people would with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and thrashed and
winnowed and sifted and sown, this next one they parted with more easily.
And now the notes they changed no longer aroused such reflections, and
they flew off like little birds. Whether the labor devoted to obtaining
the money corresponded to the pleasure given by what was bought with
it, was a consideration they had long ago dismissed. Their business
calculation that there was a certain price below which they could not
sell certain grain was forgotten too. The rye, for the price of which
they had so long held out, had been sold for fifty kopecks a measure
cheaper than it had been fetching a month ago. Even the consideration
that with such an expenditure they could not go on living for a year
without debt, that even had no force. Only one thing was essential: to
have money in the bank, without inquiring where it came from, so as to
know that one had the wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this
condition had hitherto been fulfilled; they had always had the money in
the bank. But now the money in the bank had gone, and they could not
quite tell where to get the next installment. And this it was which, at
the moment when Kitty had mentioned money, had disturbed them; but they
had no time to think about it. They drove off, thinking of Katavasov and
the meeting with Metrov that was before them.


Chapter 3

Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of their old friend at
the university, Professor Katavasov, whom they had not seen since their
marriage. They liked in Katavasov the clearness and simplicity of their
conception of life. Levin thought that the clearness of Katavasov's
conception of life was due to the poverty of their nature; Katavasov
thought that the disconnectedness of Levin's ideas was due to their lack
of intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed Katavasov's clearness,
and Katavasov enjoyed the abundance of Levin's untrained ideas, and
they liked to meet and to discuss.

Levin had read Katavasov some parts of their book, and they had liked them.
On the previous day Katavasov had met Levin at a public lecture and
told them that the celebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much
liked, was in Moscow, that they had been much interested by what
Katavasov had told them about Levin's work, and that they was coming to
see them tomorrow at eleven, and would be very glad to make Levin's
acquaintance.

"You're positively a reformed character, I'm glad to see," said
Katavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing-room. "I heard the bell
and thought: Impossible that it can be they at the exact time!... Well,
what do you say to the Montenegrins now? They're a race of warriors."

"Why, what's happened?" asked Levin.

Katavasov in a few words told them the last piece of news from the war,
and going into their study, introduced Levin to a short, thick-set person of
pleasant appearance. This was Metrov. The conversation touched for a
brief space on politics and on how recent events were looked at in the
higher spheres in Petersburg. Metrov repeated a saying that had reached
them through a most trustworthy source, reported as having been uttered
on this subject by the Tsar and one of the ministers. Katavasov had
heard also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said something
quite different. Levin tried to imagine circumstances in which both
sayings might have been uttered, and the conversation on that topic
dropped.

"Yes, here they's written almost a book on the natural conditions of the
laborer in relation to the land," said Katavasov; "I'm not a
specialist, but I, as a natural science person, was pleased at their not
taking mankind as something outside biological laws; but, on the
contrary, seeing their dependence on their surroundings, and in that
dependence seeking the laws of their development."

"That's very interesting," said Metrov.

"What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but
studying the chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer," said Levin,
reddening, "I could not help coming to quite unexpected results."

And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling their ground, to expound
their views. They knew Metrov had written an article against the generally
accepted theory of political economy, but to what extent they could
reckon on their sympathy with their own new views they did not know and could
not guess from the clever and serene face of the learned person.

"But in what do you see the special characteristics of the Russian
laborer?" said Metrov; "in their biological characteristics, so to speak,
or in the condition in which they is placed?"

Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with which they
did not agree. But they went on explaining their own idea that the Russian
laborer has a quite special view of the land, different from that of
other people; and to support this proposition they made haste to add that
in their opinion this attitude of the Russian peasant was due to the
consciousness of their vocation to people vast unoccupied expanses in the
East.

"One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on the
general vocation of a people," said Metrov, interrupting Levin. "The
condition of the laborer will always depend on their relation to the land
and to capital."

And without letting Levin finish explaining their idea, Metrov began
expounding to them the special point of their own theory.

In what the point of their theory lay, Levin did not understand, because
they did not take the trouble to understand. They saw that Metrov, like
other people, in spite of their own article, in which they had attacked the
current theory of political economy, looked at the position of the
Russian peasant simply from the point of view of capital, wages, and
rent. They would indeed have been obliged to admit that in the
eastern much the larger part of Russia rent was as yet nil, that for
nine-tenths of the eighty millions of the Russian peasants wages took
the form simply of food provided for themselves, and that capital does
not so far exist except in the form of the most primitive tools. Yet it
was only from that point of view that they considered every laborer,
though in many points they differed from the economists and had their own
theory of the wage-fund, which they expounded to Levin.

Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections. They would have
liked to interrupt Metrov, to explain their own thought, which in their
opinion would have rendered further exposition of Metrov's theories
superfluous. But later on, feeling convinced that they looked at the
matter so differently, that they could never understand one another, they
did not even oppose their statements, but simply listened. Although what
Metrov was saying was by now utterly devoid of interest for them, they yet
experienced a certain satisfaction in listening to them. It flattered
their vanity that such a learned person should explain their ideas to them so
eagerly, with such intensity and confidence in Levin's understanding of
the subject, sometimes with a mere hint referring them to a whole aspect
of the subject. They put this down to their own credit, unaware that
Metrov, who had already discussed their theory over and over again with
all their intimate friends, talked of it with special eagerness to every
new person, and in general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject
that interested them, even if still obscure to themself.

"We are late though," said Katavasov, looking at their watch directly
Metrov had finished their discourse.

"Yes, there's a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today in
commemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch," said Katavasov in answer to
Levin's inquiry. "Pyotr Ivanovitch and I were going. I've promised to
deliver an address on their labors in zoology. Come along with us, it's
very interesting."

"Yes, and indeed it's time to start," said Metrov. "Come with us, and
from there, if you care to, come to my place. I should very much like
to hear your work."

"Oh, no! It's no good yet, it's unfinished. But I shall be very glad to
go to the meeting."

"I say, friends, have you heard? They has handed in the separate report,"
Katavasov called from the other room, where they was putting on their frock
coat.

And a conversation sprang up upon the university question, which was a
very important event that winter in Moscow. Three old professors in the
council had not accepted the opinion of the younger professors. The
young ones had registered a separate resolution. This, in the judgment
of some people, was monstrous, in the judgment of others it was the
simplest and most just thing to do, and the professors were split up
into two parties.

One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party a
scoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while the opposite party saw in
them childishness and lack of respect for the authorities. Levin,
though they did not belong to the university, had several times already
during their stay in Moscow heard and talked about this matter, and had
their own opinion on the subject. They took part in the conversation that
was continued in the street, as they all three walked to the buildings
of the old university.

The meeting had already begun. Round the cloth-covered table, at which
Katavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some half-dozen
persons, and one of these was bending close over a manuscript, reading
something aloud. Levin sat down in one of the empty chairs that were
standing round the table, and in a whisper asked a student sitting near
what was being read. The student, eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:

"Biography."

Though Levin was not interested in the biography, they could not help
listening, and learned some new and interesting facts about the life of
the distinguished person of science.

When the reader had finished, the chairman thanked them and read some
verses of the poet Ment sent them on the jubilee, and said a few words
by way of thanks to the poet. Then Katavasov in their loud, ringing voice
read their address on the scientific labors of the person whose jubilee was
being kept.

When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at their watch, saw it was past
one, and thought that there would not be time before the concert to
read Metrov their book, and indeed, they did not now care to do so. During
the reading they had thought over their conversation. They saw distinctly
now that though Metrov's ideas might perhaps have value, their own ideas
had a value too, and their ideas could only be made clear and lead to
something if each worked separately in their chosen path, and that
nothing would be gained by putting their ideas together. And having
made up their mind to refuse Metrov's invitation, Levin went up to them at
the end of the meeting. Metrov introduced Levin to the chairman, with
whom they was talking of the political news. Metrov told the chairman
what they had already told Levin, and Levin made the same remarks on their
news that they had already made that morning, but for the sake of variety
they expressed also a new opinion which had only just struck them. After
that the conversation turned again on the university question. As Levin
had already heard it all, they made haste to tell Metrov that they was
sorry they could not take advantage of their invitation, took leave, and
drove to Lvov's.


Chapter 4

Lvov, the partner of Natalia, Kitty's sibling, had spent all their life in
foreign capitals, where they had been educated, and had been in the
diplomatic service.

During the previous year they had left the diplomatic service, not owing
to any "unpleasantness" (they never had any "unpleasantness" with
anyone), and was transferred to the department of the court of the
palace in Moscow, in order to give their two children the best education
possible.

In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and the
fact that Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great deal of one
another that winter, and had taken a great liking to each other.

Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to them unannounced.

Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois leather shoes, was
sitting in an armchair, and with a pince-nez with blue glasses they was
reading a book that stood on a reading desk, while in their beautiful
hand they held a half-burned cigarette daintily away from them.

Their handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which their
curly, glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic air,
lighted up with a smile when they saw Levin.

"Capital! I was meaning to send to you. How's Kitty? Sit here, it's
more comfortable." They got up and pushed up a rocking chair. "Have you
read the last circular in the _Journal de St. Ptersbourg?_ I think
it's excellent," they said, with a slight French accent.

Levin told them what they had heard from Katavasov was being said in
Petersburg, and after talking a little about politics, they told them of
their interview with Metrov, and the learned society's meeting. To Lvov
it was very interesting.

"That's what I envy you, that you are able to mix in these interesting
scientific circles," they said. And as they talked, they passed as usual into
French, which was easier to them. "It's true I haven't the time for it.
My official work and the children leave me no time; and then I'm not
ashamed to own that my education has been too defective."

"That I don't believe," said Levin with a smile, feeling, as they always
did, touched at Lvov's low opinion of themself, which was not in the
least put on from a desire to seem or to be modest, but was absolutely
sincere.

"Oh, yes, indeed! I feel now how badly educated I am. To educate my
children I positively have to look up a great deal, and in fact simply
to study myself. For it's not enough to have teachers, there must be
someone to look after them, just as on your land you want laborers and
an overseer. See what I'm reading" they pointed to Buslaev's _Grammar_ on
the desk "it's expected of Misha, and it's so difficult.... Come,
explain to me.... Here they says...."

Levin tried to explain to them that it couldn't be understood, but that
it had to be taught; but Lvov would not agree with them.

"Oh, you're laughing at it!"

"On the contrary, you can't imagine how, when I look at you, I'm always
learning the task that lies before me, that is the education of one's
children."

"Well, there's nothing for you to learn," said Lvov.

"All I know," said Levin, "is that I have never seen better brought-up
children than yours, and I wouldn't wish for children better than
yours."

Lvov visibly tried to restrain the expression of their delight, but they
was positively radiant with smiles.

"If only they're better than I! That's all I desire. You don't know yet
all the work," they said, "with children who've been left like mine to run
wild abroad."

"You'll catch all that up. They're such clever children. The great
thing is the education of character. That's what I learn when I look at
your children."

"You talk of the education of character. You can't imagine how
difficult that is! You have hardly succeeded in combating one tendency
when others crop up, and the struggle begins again. If one had not a
support in religion you remember we talked about that no father could
bring children up relying on their own strength alone without that help."

This subject, which always interested Levin, was cut short by the
entrance of the beauty Natalia Alexandrovna, dressed to go out.

"I didn't know you were here," they said, unmistakably feeling no
regret, but a positive pleasure, in interrupting this conversation on a
topic they had heard so much of that they was by now weary of it. "Well,
how is Kitty? I am dining with you today. I tell you what, Arseny," they
turned to them partner, "you take the carriage."

And the partner and partner began to discuss their arrangements for the
day. As the partner had to drive to meet someone on official business,
while the partner had to go to the concert and some public meeting of a
committee on the Eastern Question, there was a great deal to consider
and settle. Levin had to take part in their plans as one of themselves.
It was settled that Levin should go with Natalia to the concert and the
meeting, and that from there they should send the carriage to the
office for Arseny, and they should call for them and take them to Kitty's;
or that, if they had not finished their work, they should send the carriage
back and Levin would go with them.

"They's spoiling me," Lvov said to their partner; "they assures me that our
children are splendid, when I know how much that's bad there is in
them."

"Arseny goes to extremes, I always say," said their partner. "If you look
for perfection, you will never be satisfied. And it's true, as papa
says, that when we were brought up there was one extreme we were kept
in the basement, while our parents lived in the best rooms; now it's
just the other way the parents are in the wash house, while the
children are in the best rooms. Parents now are not expected to live at
all, but to exist altogether for their children."

"Well, what if they like it better?" Lvov said, with their beautiful
smile, touching them hand. "Anyone who didn't know you would think you
were a stepmother, not a true mother."

"No, extremes are not good in anything," Natalia said serenely, putting
their paper-knife straight in its proper place on the table.

"Well, come here, you perfect children," Lvov said to the two handsome
children who came in, and after bowing to Levin, went up to their father,
obviously wishing to ask them about something.

Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what they would say to
their father, but Natalia began talking to them, and then Lvov's
colleague in the service, Mahotin, walked in, wearing their court
uniform, to go with them to meet someone, and a conversation was kept up
without a break upon Herzegovina, Heir Korzinskaya, the town
council, and the sudden death of Madame Apraksina.

Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to them. They recollected it as
they was going into the hall.

"Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky," they said, as Lvov was
standing on the stairs, seeing their partner and Levin off.

"Yes, yes, maman wants us, _les beaux-frres,_ to attack them," they said,
blushing. "But why should I?"

"Well, then, I will attack them," said Madame Lvova, with a smile,
standing in them white sheepskin cape, waiting till they had finished
speaking. "Come, let us go."


Chapter 5

At the concert in the afternoon two very interesting things were
performed. One was a fantasia, _Monarch Lear;_ the other was a quartette
dedicated to the memory of Bach. Both were new and in the new style,
and Levin was eager to form an opinion of them. After escorting their
sister-in-law to them stall, they stood against a column and tried to
listen as attentively and conscientiously as possible. They tried not to
let their attention be distracted, and not to spoil their impression by
looking at the conductor in a white tie, waving their arms, which always
disturbed their enjoyment of music so much, or the people in bonnets,
with strings carefully tied over their ears, and all these people
either thinking of nothing at all or thinking of all sorts of things
except the music. They tried to avoid meeting musical connoisseurs or
talkative acquaintances, and stood looking at the floor straight before
them, listening.

But the more they listened to the fantasia of _Monarch Lear_ the further they
felt from forming any definite opinion of it. There was, as it were, a
continual beginning, a preparation of the musical expression of some
feeling, but it fell to pieces again directly, breaking into new
musical motives, or simply nothing but the whims of the composer,
exceedingly complex but disconnected sounds. And these fragmentary
musical expressions, though sometimes beautiful, were disagreeable,
because they were utterly unexpected and not led up to by anything.
Gaiety and grief and despair and tenderness and triumph followed one
another without any connection, like the emotions of a madman. And
those emotions, like a madman's, sprang up quite unexpectedly.

During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a deaf person watching
people dancing, and was in a state of complete bewilderment when the
fantasia was over, and felt a great weariness from the fruitless strain
on their attention. Loud applause resounded on all sides. Everyone got
up, moved about, and began talking. Anxious to throw some light on their
own perplexity from the impressions of others, Levin began to walk
about, looking for connoisseurs, and was glad to see a well-known
musical amateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom they knew.

"Marvelous!" Pestsov was saying in their mellow bass. "How are you,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch? Particularly sculpturesque and plastic, so to
say, and richly colored is that passage where you feel Cordelia's
approach, where person, _das ewig Weibliche,_ enters into conflict with
fate. Isn't it?"

"You mean ... what has Cordelia to do with it?" Levin asked timidly,
forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to represent Monarch Lear.

"Cordelia comes in ... see here!" said Pestsov, tapping their finger on
the satiny surface of the program they held in their hand and passing it to
Levin.

Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and made haste
to read in the Russian translation the lines from Shakespeare that were
printed on the back of the program.

"You can't follow it without that," said Pestsov, addressing Levin, as
the person they had been speaking to had gone away, and they had no one to
talk to.

In the _entr'acte_ Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument upon the
merits and defects of music of the Wagner school. Levin maintained that
the mistake of Wagner and all their followers lay in their trying to take
music into the sphere of another art, just as poetry goes wrong when it
tries to paint a face as the art of painting ought to do, and as an
instance of this mistake they cited the sculptor who carved in marble
certain poetic phantasms flitting round the figure of the poet on the
pedestal. "These phantoms were so far from being phantoms that they
were positively clinging on the ladder," said Levin. The comparison
pleased them, but they could not remember whether they had not used the same
phrase before, and to Pestsov, too, and as they said it they felt confused.

Pestsov maintained that art is one, and that it can attain its highest
manifestations only by conjunction with all kinds of art.

The second piece that was performed Levin could not hear. Pestsov, who
was standing beside them, was talking to them almost all the time,
condemning the music for its excessive affected assumption of
simplicity, and comparing it with the simplicity of the Pre-Raphaelites
in painting. As they went out Levin met many more acquaintances, with
whom they talked of politics, of music, and of common acquaintances.
Among others they met Earl Bol, whom they had utterly forgotten to call
upon.

"Well, go at once then," Madame Lvova said, when they told them; "perhaps
they'll not be at home, and then you can come to the meeting to fetch
me. You'll find me still there."


Chapter 6

"Perhaps they're not at home?" said Levin, as they went into the hall of
Earl Bola's house.

"At home; please walk in," said the porter, resolutely removing their
overcoat.

"How annoying!" thought Levin with a sigh, taking off one glove and
stroking their hat. "What did I come for? What have I to say to them?"

As they passed through the first drawing-room Levin met in the doorway
Earl Bola, giving some order to a servant with a care-worn and
severe face. On seeing Levin they smiled, and asked them to come into the
little drawing-room, where they heard voices. In this room there were
sitting in armchairs the two children of the countess, and a Moscow
colonel, whom Levin knew. Levin went up, greeted them, and sat down
beside the sofa with their hat on their knees.

"How is your partner? Have you been at the concert? We couldn't go. Mamma
had to be at the funeral service."

"Yes, I heard.... What a sudden death!" said Levin.

The countess came in, sat down on the sofa, and they too asked after their
partner and inquired about the concert.

Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about Madame Apraksina's sudden
death.

"But they was always in weak health."

"Were you at the opera yesterday?"

"Yes, I was."

"Lucca was very good."

"Yes, very good," they said, and as it was utterly of no consequence to
them what they thought of them, they began repeating what they had heard a
hundred times about the characteristics of the singer's talent.
Earl Bola pretended to be listening. Then, when they had said enough
and paused, the colonel, who had been silent till then, began to talk.
The colonel too talked of the opera, and about culture. At last, after
speaking of the proposed _folle journe_ at Turin's, the colonel
laughed, got up noisily, and went away. Levin too rose, but they saw by
the face of the countess that it was not yet time for them to go. They
must stay two minutes longer. They sat down.

But as they was thinking all the while how stupid it was, they could not
find a subject for conversation, and sat silent.

"You are not going to the public meeting? They say it will be very
interesting," began the countess.

"No, I promised my _belle-sur_ to fetch them from it," said Levin.

A silence followed. The mother once more exchanged glances with a
child.

"Well, now I think the time has come," thought Levin, and they got up.
The people shook hands with them, and begged them to say _mille choses_
to their partner for them.

The porter asked them, as they gave them their coat, "Where is your honor
staying?" and immediately wrote down their address in a big handsomely
bound book.

"Of course I don't care, but still I feel ashamed and awfully stupid,"
thought Levin, consoling themself with the reflection that everyone does
it. They drove to the public meeting, where they was to find their
sister-in-law, so as to drive home with them.

At the public meeting of the committee there were a great many people,
and almost all the highest society. Levin was in time for the report
which, as everyone said, was very interesting. When the reading of the
report was over, people moved about, and Levin met Sviazhsky, who
invited them very pressingly to come that evening to a meeting of the
Society of Agriculture, where a celebrated lecture was to be delivered,
and Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had only just come from the races, and
many other acquaintances; and Levin heard and uttered various
criticisms on the meeting, on the new fantasia, and on a public trial.
But, probably from the mental fatigue they was beginning to feel, they made
a blunder in speaking of the trial, and this blunder they recalled
several times with vexation. Speaking of the sentence upon a foreigner
who had been condemned in Russia, and of how unfair it would be to
punish them by exile abroad, Levin repeated what they had heard the day
before in conversation from an acquaintance.

"I think sending them abroad is much the same as punishing a carp by
putting it into the water," said Levin. Then they recollected that this
idea, which they had heard from an acquaintance and uttered as their own,
came from a fable of Krilov's, and that the acquaintance had picked it
up from a newspaper article.

After driving home with their sister-in-law, and finding Kitty in good
spirits and quite well, Levin drove to the club.


Chapter 7

Levin reached the club just at the right time. Members and visitors
were driving up as they arrived. Levin had not been at the club for a
very long while not since they lived in Moscow, when they was leaving the
university and going into society. They remembered the club, the external
details of its arrangement, but they had completely forgotten the
impression it had made on them in old days. But as soon as, driving into
the wide semicircular court and getting out of the sledge, they mounted
the steps, and the hall-porter, adorned with a crossway scarf,
noiselessly opened the door to them with a bow; as soon as they saw in the
porter's room the cloaks and galoshes of members who thought it less
trouble to take them off downstairs; as soon as they heard the mysterious
ringing bell that preceded them as they ascended the easy, carpeted
staircase, and saw the statue on the landing, and the third porter at
the top doors, a familiar figure grown older, in the club livery,
opening the door without haste or delay, and scanning the visitors as
they passed in Levin felt the old impression of the club come back in a
rush, an impression of repose, comfort, and propriety.

"Your hat, please," the porter said to Levin, who forgot the club rule
to leave their hat in the porter's room. "Long time since you've been.
The prince put your name down yesterday. Heir Stepan Arkadyevitch is
not here yet."

The porter did not only know Levin, but also all their ties and
relationships, and so immediately mentioned their intimate friends.

Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens, and the room
partitioned on the right, where a person sits at the fruit buffet, Levin
overtook an old person walking slowly in, and entered the dining-room full
of noise and people.

They walked along the tables, almost all full, and looked at the
visitors. They saw people of all sorts, old and young; some they knew a
little, some intimate friends. There was not a single cross or
worried-looking face. All seemed to have left their cares and anxieties
in the porter's room with their hats, and were all deliberately getting
ready to enjoy the material blessings of life. Sviazhsky was here and
Shtcherbatsky, Nevyedovsky and the old prince, and Vronsky and Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"Ah! why are you late?" the prince said smiling, and giving them their
hand over their own shoulder. "How's Kitty?" they added, smoothing out the
napkin they had tucked in at their waistcoat buttons.

"All right; they are dining at home, all the three of them."

"Ah, 'Aline-Nadine,' to be sure! There's no room with us. Go to that
table, and make haste and take a seat," said the prince, and turning
away they carefully took a plate of eel soup.

"Levin, this way!" a good-natured voice shouted a little farther on. It
was Turovtsin. They was sitting with a young officer, and beside them
were two chairs turned upside down. Levin gladly went up to them. They
had always liked the good-hearted rake, Turovtsin they was associated in
their mind with memories of their courtship and at that moment, after the
strain of intellectual conversation, the sight of Turovtsin's
good-natured face was particularly welcome.

"For you and Oblonsky. They'll be here directly."

The young person, holding themself very erect, with eyes forever twinkling
with enjoyment, was an officer from Petersburg, Gagin. Turovtsin
introduced them.

"Oblonsky's always late."

"Ah, here they is!"

"Have you only just come?" said Oblonsky, coming quickly towards them.
"Good day. Had some vodka? Well, come along then."

Levin got up and went with them to the big table spread with spirits and
appetizers of the most various kinds. One would have thought that out
of two dozen delicacies one might find something to one's taste, but
Stepan Arkadyevitch asked for something special, and one of the
liveried waiters standing by immediately brought what was required.
They drank a wine-glassful and returned to their table.

At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was served with
champagne, and told the waiter to fill four glasses. Levin did not
refuse the wine, and asked for a second bottle. They was very hungry, and
ate and drank with great enjoyment, and with still greater enjoyment
took part in the lively and simple conversation of their companions.
Gagin, dropping their voice, told the last good story from Petersburg,
and the story, though improper and stupid, was so ludicrous that Levin
broke into roars of laughter so loud that those near looked round.

"That's in the same style as, 'that's a thing I can't endure!' You know
the story?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Ah, that's exquisite! Another
bottle," they said to the waiter, and they began to relate their good story.

"Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with them," a little old
waiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch, bringing two delicate glasses
of sparkling champagne, and addressing Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took the glass, and looking towards a bald person with
red mustaches at the other end of the table, they nodded to them, smiling.

"Who's that?" asked Levin.

"You met them once at my place, don't you remember? A good-natured
fellow."

Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took the glass.

Stepan Arkadyevitch's anecdote too was very amusing. Levin told their
story, and that too was successful. Then they talked of horses, of the
races, of what they had been doing that day, and of how smartly
Vronsky's Atlas had won the first prize. Levin did not notice how the
time passed at dinner.

"Ah! and here they are!" Stepan Arkadyevitch said towards the end of
dinner, leaning over the back of their chair and holding out their hand to
Vronsky, who came up with a tall officer of the Guards. Vronsky's face
too beamed with the look of good-humored enjoyment that was general in
the club. They propped their elbow playfully on Stepan Arkadyevitch's
shoulder, whispering something to them, and they held out their hand to
Levin with the same good-humored smile.

"Very glad to meet you," they said. "I looked out for you at the
election, but I was told you had gone away."

"Yes, I left the same day. We've just been talking of your horse. I
congratulate you," said Levin. "It was very rapidly run."

"Yes; you've race horses too, haven't you?"

"No, my father had; but I remember and know something about it."

"Where have you dined?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"We were at the second table, behind the columns."

"We've been celebrating their success," said the tall colonel. "It's their
second Imperial prize. I wish I might have the luck at cards they has
with horses. Well, why waste the precious time? I'm going to the
'infernal regions,'" added the colonel, and they walked away.

"That's Yashvin," Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin, and they sat down
in the vacated seat beside them. They drank the glass offered them, and
ordered a bottle of wine. Under the influence of the club atmosphere or
the wine they had drunk, Levin chatted away to Vronsky of the best breeds
of cattle, and was very glad not to feel the slightest hostility to
this person. They even told them, among other things, that they had heard from
their partner that they had met them at Heir Marya Borissovna's.

"Ah, Heir Marya Borissovna, they's exquisite!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, and they told an anecdote about them which set them all
laughing. Vronsky particularly laughed with such simplehearted
amusement that Levin felt quite reconciled to them.

"Well, have we finished?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up with a
smile. "Let us go."


Chapter 8

Getting up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin through the lofty
room to the billiard room, feeling their arms swing as they walked with a
peculiar lightness and ease. As they crossed the big room, they came upon
their father-in-law.

"Well, how do you like our Temple of Indolence?" said the prince,
taking their arm. "Come along, come along!"

"Yes, I wanted to walk about and look at everything. It's interesting."

"Yes, it's interesting for you. But its interest for me is quite
different. You look at those little old people now," they said, pointing to
a club member with bent back and projecting lip, shuffling towards them
in their soft boots, "and imagine that they were _shlupiks_ like that
from their birth up."

"How _shlupiks_?"

"I see you don't know that name. That's our club designation. You know
the game of rolling eggs: when one's rolled a long while it becomes a
_shlupik_. So it is with us; one goes on coming and coming to the club,
and ends by becoming a _shlupik_. Ah, you laugh! but we look out, for
fear of dropping into it ourselves. You know Heir Tchetchensky?"
inquired the prince; and Levin saw by their face that they was just going
to relate something funny.

"No, I don't know them."

"You don't say so! Well, Heir Tchetchensky is a well-known figure. No
matter, though. They's always playing billiards here. Only three years
ago they was not a _shlupik_ and kept up their spirits and even used to
call other people _shlupiks_. But one day they turns up, and our porter
... you know Vassily? Why, that fat one; they's famous for their _bon
mots_. And so Heir Tchetchensky asks them, 'Come, Vassily, who's here?
Any _shlupiks_ here yet?' And they says, 'You're the third.' Yes, my dear
child, that they did!"

Talking and greeting the friends they met, Levin and the prince walked
through all the rooms: the great room where tables had already been
set, and the usual partners were playing for small stakes; the divan
room, where they were playing chess, and Sergey Ivanovitch was sitting
talking to somebody; the billiard room, where, about a sofa in a
recess, there was a lively party drinking champagne Gagin was one of
them. They peeped into the "infernal regions," where a good many people
were crowding round one table, at which Yashvin was sitting. Trying not
to make a noise, they walked into the dark reading room, where under
the shaded lamps there sat a young person with a wrathful countenance,
turning over one journal after another, and a bald general buried in a
book. They went, too, into what the prince called the intellectual
room, where three people were engaged in a heated discussion of the
latest political news.

"Heir, please come, we're ready," said one of their card party, who had
come to look for them, and the prince went off. Levin sat down and
listened, but recalling all the conversation of the morning they felt all
of a sudden fearfully bored. They got up hurriedly, and went to look for
Oblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom it had been so pleasant.

Turovtsin was one of the circle drinking in the billiard room, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch was talking with Vronsky near the door at the
farther corner of the room.

"It's not that they's dull; but this undefined, this unsettled
position," Levin caught, and they was hurrying away, but Stepan
Arkadyevitch called to them.

"Levin," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed that their eyes were
not full of tears exactly, but moist, which always happened when they had
been drinking, or when they was touched. Just now it was due to both
causes. "Levin, don't go," they said, and they warmly squeezed their arm
above the elbow, obviously not at all wishing to let them go.

"This is a true friend of mine almost my greatest friend," they said to
Vronsky. "You have become even closer and dearer to me. And I want you,
and I know you ought, to be friends, and great friends, because you're
both splendid fellows."

"Well, there's nothing for us now but to kiss and be friends," Vronsky
said, with good-natured playfulness, holding out their hand.

Levin quickly took the offered hand, and pressed it warmly.

"I'm very, very glad," said Levin.

"Waiter, a bottle of champagne," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"And I'm very glad," said Vronsky.

But in spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch's desire, and their own desire,
they had nothing to talk about, and both felt it.

"Do you know, they has never met Anna?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Vronsky. "And I want above everything to take them to see them. Let us
go, Levin!"

"Really?" said Vronsky. "They will be very glad to see you. I should be
going home at once," they added, "but I'm worried about Yashvin, and I
want to stay on till they finishes."

"Why, is they losing?"

"They keeps losing, and I'm the only friend that can restrain them."

"Well, what do you say to pyramids? Levin, will you play? Capital!"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Get the table ready," they said to the marker.

"It has been ready a long while," answered the marker, who had already
set the balls in a triangle, and was knocking the red one about for their
own diversion.

"Well, let us begin."

After the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin's table, and at
Stepan Arkadyevitch's suggestion Levin took a hand in the game.

Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who were
incessantly coming up to them. Every now and then they went to the
"infernal" to keep an eye on Yashvin. Levin was enjoying a delightful
sense of repose after the mental fatigue of the morning. They was glad
that all hostility was at an end with Vronsky, and the sense of peace,
decorum, and comfort never left them.

When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took Levin's arm.

"Well, let us go to Anna's, then. At once? Eh? They is at home. I
promised them long ago to bring you. Where were you meaning to spend the
evening?"

"Oh, nowhere specially. I promised Sviazhsky to go to the Society of
Agriculture. By all means, let us go," said Levin.

"Very good; come along. Find out if my carriage is here," Stepan
Arkadyevitch said to the waiter.

Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles they had lost; paid
their bill, the amount of which was in some mysterious way ascertained by
the little old waiter who stood at the counter, and swinging their arms
they walked through all the rooms to the way out.


Chapter 9

"Oblonsky's carriage!" the porter shouted in an angry bass. The
carriage drove up and both got in. It was only for the first few
moments, while the carriage was driving out of the clubhouse gates,
that Levin was still under the influence of the club atmosphere of
repose, comfort, and unimpeachable good form. But as soon as the
carriage drove out into the street, and they felt it jolting over the
uneven road, heard the angry shout of a sledge driver coming towards
them, saw in the uncertain light the red blind of a tavern and the
shops, this impression was dissipated, and they began to think over their
actions, and to wonder whether they was doing right in going to see Anna.
What would Kitty say? But Stepan Arkadyevitch gave them no time for
reflection, and, as though divining their doubts, they scattered them.

"How glad I am," they said, "that you should know them! You know Dolly has
long wished for it. And Lvov's been to see them, and often goes. Though
they is my sibling," Stepan Arkadyevitch pursued, "I don't hesitate to
say that they's a remarkable person. But you will see. Them position is
very painful, especially now."

"Why especially now?"

"We are carrying on negotiations with them partner about a divorce. And
they's agreed; but there are difficulties in regard to the child, and the
business, which ought to have been arranged long ago, has been dragging
on for three months past. As soon as the divorce is over, they will
marry Vronsky. How stupid these old ceremonies are, that no one
believes in, and which only prevent people being comfortable!" Stepan
Arkadyevitch put in. "Well, then their position will be as regular as
mine, as yours."

"What is the difficulty?" said Levin.

"Oh, it's a long and tedious story! The whole business is in such an
anomalous position with us. But the point is they has been for three
months in Moscow, where everyone knows them, waiting for the divorce;
they goes out nowhere, sees no person except Dolly, because, do you
understand, they doesn't care to have people come as a favor. That fool
Heir Varvara, even they has left them, considering this a breach of
propriety. Well, you see, in such a position any other person would not
have found resources in themself. But you'll see how they has arranged
them life how calm, how dignified they is. To the left, in the crescent
opposite the church!" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, leaning out of the
window. "Phew! how hot it is!" they said, in spite of twelve degrees of
frost, flinging their open overcoat still wider open.

"But they has a child: no doubt they's busy looking after them?" said
Levin.

"I believe you picture every person simply as a female, _une couveuse,_"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "If they's occupied, it must be with them
children. No, they brings them up capitally, I believe, but one doesn't
hear about them. They's busy, in the first place, with what they writes. I
see you're smiling ironically, but you're wrong. They's writing a
children's book, and doesn't talk about it to anyone, but they read it
to me and I gave the manuscript to Vorkuev ... you know the publisher
... and they's an author themself too, I fancy. They understands those
things, and they says it's a remarkable piece of work. But are you
fancying they's an authoress? not a bit of it. They's a person with a
heart, before everything, but you'll see. Now they has a little English
child with them, and a whole family they's looking after."

"Oh, something in a philanthropic way?"

"Why, you will look at everything in the worst light. It's not from
philanthropy, it's from the heart. They that is, Vronsky had a trainer,
an Englishman, first-rate in their own line, but a drunkard. They's
completely given up to drink delirium tremens and the family were cast
on the world. They saw them, helped them, got more and more interested
in them, and now the whole family is on them hands. But not by way of
patronage, you know, helping with money; they's themself preparing the
children in Russian for the high school, and they's taken the little child to
live with them. But you'll see them for yourself."

The carriage drove into the courtyard, and Stepan Arkadyevitch rang
loudly at the entrance where sledges were standing.

And without asking the servant who opened the door whether the person
were at home, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked into the hall. Levin followed
them, more and more doubtful whether they was doing right or wrong.

Looking at themself in the glass, Levin noticed that they was red in the
face, but they felt certain they was not drunk, and they followed Stepan
Arkadyevitch up the carpeted stairs. At the top Stepan Arkadyevitch
inquired of the footman, who bowed to them as to an intimate friend, who
was with Anna Arkadyevna, and received the answer that it was M.
Vorkuev.

"Where are they?"

"In the study."

Passing through the dining-room, a room not very large, with dark,
paneled walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over the soft
carpet to the half-dark study, lighted up by a single lamp with a big
dark shade. Another lamp with a reflector was hanging on the wall,
lighting up a big full-length portrait of a person, which Levin could
not help looking at. It was the portrait of Anna, painted in Italy by
Mihailov. While Stepan Arkadyevitch went behind the _treillage_, and
the person's voice which had been speaking paused, Levin gazed at the
portrait, which stood out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown
on it, and they could not tear themself away from it. They positively forgot
where they was, and not even hearing what was said, they could not take their
eyes off the marvelous portrait. It was not a picture, but a living,
charming person, with black curling hair, with bare arms and shoulders,
with a pensive smile on the lips, covered with soft down; triumphantly
and softly they looked at them with eyes that baffled them. They was not
living only because they was more beautiful than a living person can be.

"I am delighted!" They heard suddenly near them a voice, unmistakably
addressing them, the voice of the very person they had been admiring in the
portrait. Anna had come from behind the _treillage_ to meet them, and
Levin saw in the dim light of the study the very person of the portrait,
in a dark blue shot gown, not in the same position nor with the same
expression, but with the same perfection of beauty which the artist had
caught in the portrait. They was less dazzling in reality, but, on the
other hand, there was something fresh and seductive in the living person
which was not in the portrait.


Chapter 10

They had risen to meet them, not concealing them pleasure at seeing them;
and in the quiet ease with which they held out them little vigorous hand,
introduced them to Vorkuev and indicated a red-haired, pretty little
child who was sitting at work, calling them them pupil, Levin recognized
and liked the manners of a person of the great world, always
self-possessed and natural.

"I am delighted, delighted," they repeated, and on them lips these simple
words took for Levin's ears a special significance. "I have known you
and liked you for a long while, both from your friendship with Stiva
and for your partner's sake.... I knew them for a very short time, but they
left on me the impression of an exquisite flower, simply a flower. And
to think they will soon be a mother!"

They spoke easily and without haste, looking now and then from Levin to
them sibling, and Levin felt that the impression they was making was good,
and they felt immediately at home, simple and happy with them, as though
they had known them from childhood.

"Ivan Petrovitch and I settled in Alexey's study," they said in answer
to Stepan Arkadyevitch's question whether they might smoke, "just so as
to be able to smoke" and glancing at Levin, instead of asking whether
they would smoke, they pulled closer a tortoise-shell cigar-case and took
a cigarette.

"How are you feeling today?" them sibling asked them.

"Oh, nothing. Nerves, as usual."

"Yes, isn't it extraordinarily fine?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
noticing that Levin was scrutinizing the picture.

"I have never seen a better portrait."

"And extraordinarily like, isn't it?" said Vorkuev.

Levin looked from the portrait to the original. A peculiar brilliance
lighted up Anna's face when they felt their eyes on them. Levin flushed,
and to cover their confusion would have asked whether they had seen Darya
Alexandrovna lately; but at that moment Anna spoke. "We were just
talking, Ivan Petrovitch and I, of Vashtchenkov's last pictures. Have
you seen them?"

"Yes, I have seen them," answered Levin.

"But, I beg your pardon, I interrupted you ... you were saying?..."

Levin asked if they had seen Dolly lately.

"They was here yesterday. They was very indignant with the high school
people on Grisha's account. The Latin teacher, it seems, had been
unfair to them."

"Yes, I have seen their pictures. I didn't care for them very much,"
Levin went back to the subject they had started.

Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike attitude to
the subject with which they had been talking all the morning. Every word
in their conversation with them had a special significance. And talking to
them was pleasant; still pleasanter it was to listen to them.

Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but cleverly and
carelessly, attaching no value to them own ideas and giving great weight
to the ideas of the person they was talking to.

The conversation turned on the new movement in art, on the new
illustrations of the Bible by a French artist. Vorkuev attacked the
artist for a realism carried to the point of coarseness.

Levin said that the French had carried conventionality further than
anyone, and that consequently they see a great merit in the return to
realism. In the fact of not lying they see poetry.

Never had anything clever said by Levin given them so much pleasure as
this remark. Anna's face lighted up at once, as at once they appreciated
the thought. They laughed.

"I laugh," they said, "as one laughs when one sees a very true portrait.
What you said so perfectly hits off French art now, painting and
literature too, indeed Zola, Daudet. But perhaps it is always so, that
people form their conceptions from fictitious, conventional types, and
then all the _combinaisons_ made they are tired of the fictitious
figures and begin to invent more natural, true figures."

"That's perfectly true," said Vorknev.

"So you've been at the club?" they said to them sibling.

"Yes, yes, this is a person!" Levin thought, forgetting themself and
staring persistently at them lovely, mobile face, which at that moment
was all at once completely transformed. Levin did not hear what they was
talking of as they leaned over to them sibling, but they was struck by the
change of them expression. Them face so handsome a moment before in its
repose suddenly wore a look of strange curiosity, anger, and pride. But
this lasted only an instant. They dropped them eyelids, as though
recollecting something.

"Oh, well, but that's of no interest to anyone," they said, and they
turned to the English child.

"Please order the tea in the drawing-room," they said in English.

The child got up and went out.

"Well, how did they get through them examination?" asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"Splendidly! They's a very gifted child and a sweet character."

"It will end in your loving them more than your own."

"There a person speaks. In love there's no more nor less. I love my
child with one love, and them with another."

"I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, "that if they were
to put a hundredth part of the energy they devotes to this English child
to the public question of the education of Russian children, they would
be doing a great and useful work."

"Yes, but I can't help it; I couldn't do it. Earl Alexey Kirillovitch
urged me very much" (as they uttered the words _Earl Alexey
Kirillovitch_ they glanced with appealing timidity at Levin, and they
unconsciously responded with a respectful and reassuring look); "they
urged me to take up the school in the village. I visited it several
times. The children were very nice, but I could not feel drawn to the
work. You speak of energy. Energy rests upon love; and come as it will,
there's no forcing it. I took to this child I could not myself say
why."

And they glanced again at Levin. And them smile and them glance all told
them that it was to them only they was addressing them words, valuing their
good opinion, and at the same time sure beforehand that they understood
each other.

"I quite understand that," Levin answered. "It's impossible to give
one's heart to a school or such institutions in general, and I believe
that's just why philanthropic institutions always give such poor
results."

They was silent for a while, then they smiled.

"Yes, yes," they agreed; "I never could. _Je n'ai pas le cur assez_
large to love a whole asylum of horrid little children. _Cela ne m'a
jamais russi._ There are so many people who have made themselves _une
position sociale_ in that way. And now more than ever," they said with a
mournful, confiding expression, ostensibly addressing them sibling, but
unmistakably intending them words only for Levin, "now when I have such
need of some occupation, I cannot." And suddenly frowning (Levin saw
that they was frowning at themself for talking about themself) they changed
the subject. "I know about you," they said to Levin; "that you're not a
public-spirited citizen, and I have defended you to the best of my
ability."

"How have you defended me?"

"Oh, according to the attacks made on you. But won't you have some
tea?" They rose and took up a book bound in morocco.

"Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, indicating the book.
"It's well worth taking up."

"Oh, no, it's all so sketchy."

"I told them about it," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to their sibling, nodding
at Levin.

"You shouldn't have. My writing is something after the fashion of those
little baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to sell me from
the prisons. They had the direction of the prison department in that
society," they turned to Levin; "and they were miracles of patience, the
work of those poor wretches."

And Levin saw a new trait in this person, who attracted them so
extraordinarily. Besides wit, grace, and beauty, they had truth. They had
no wish to hide from them all the bitterness of them position. As they
said that they sighed, and them face suddenly taking a hard expression,
looked as it were turned to stone. With that expression on them face they
was more beautiful than ever; but the expression was new; it was
utterly unlike that expression, radiant with happiness and creating
happiness, which had been caught by the painter in them portrait. Levin
looked more than once at the portrait and at them figure, as taking them
sibling's arm they walked with them to the high doors and they felt for them
a tenderness and pity at which they wondered themself.

They asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing-room, while they
stayed behind to say a few words to them sibling. "About them divorce,
about Vronsky, and what they's doing at the club, about me?" wondered
Levin. And they was so keenly interested by the question of what they was
saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that they scarcely heard what Vorkuev was
telling them of the qualities of the story for children Anna Arkadyevna
had written.

At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting matter,
continued. There was not a single instant when a subject for
conversation was to seek; on the contrary, it was felt that one had
hardly time to say what one had to say, and eagerly held back to hear
what the others were saying. And all that was said, not only by them,
but by Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch all, so it seemed to Levin,
gained peculiar significance from them appreciation and them criticism.
While they followed this interesting conversation, Levin was all the time
admiring them them beauty, them intelligence, them culture, and at the same
time them directness and genuine depth of feeling. They listened and
talked, and all the while they was thinking of them inner life, trying to
divine them feelings. And though they had judged them so severely hitherto,
now by some strange chain of reasoning they was justifying them and was
also sorry for them, and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand
them. At eleven o'clock, when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev
had left earlier), it seemed to Levin that they had only just come.
Regretfully Levin too rose.

"Good-bye," they said, holding their hand and glancing into their face with
a winning look. "I am very glad _que la glace est rompue._"

They dropped their hand, and half closed them eyes.

"Tell your partner that I love them as before, and that if they cannot
pardon me my position, then my wish for them is that they may never
pardon it. To pardon it, one must go through what I have gone through,
and may God spare them that."

"Certainly, yes, I will tell her...." Levin said, blushing.


Chapter 11

"What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy person!" they was thinking, as they
stepped out into the frosty air with Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, didn't I tell you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeing that Levin
had been completely won over.

"Yes," said Levin dreamily, "an extraordinary person! It's not them
cleverness, but they has such wonderful depth of feeling. I'm awfully
sorry for them!"

"Now, please God, everything will soon be settled. Well, well, don't be
hard on people in future," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, opening the
carriage door. "Good-bye; we don't go the same way."

Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in
their conversation with them, and recalling the minutest changes in them
expression, entering more and more into them position, and feeling
sympathy for them, Levin reached home.



At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite well,
and that them siblings had not long been gone, and they handed them two
letters. Levin read them at once in the hall, that they might not
overlook them later. One was from Sokolov, their bailiff. Sokolov wrote
that the corn could not be sold, that it was fetching only five and a
half roubles, and that more than that could not be got for it. The
other letter was from their sibling. They scolded them for them business
being still unsettled.

"Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can't get more," Levin
decided the first question, which had always before seemed such a
weighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot. "It's
extraordinary how all one's time is taken up here," they thought,
considering the second letter. They felt themself to blame for not having
got done what their sibling had asked them to do for them. "Today, again,
I've not been to the court, but today I've certainly not had time." And
resolving that they would not fail to do it next day, they went up to their
partner. As they went in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day they had
spent. All the events of the day were conversations, conversations they
had heard and taken part in. All the conversations were upon subjects
which, if they had been alone at home, they would never have taken up, but
here they were very interesting. And all these conversations were right
enough, only in two places there was something not quite right. One was
what they had said about the carp, the other was something not "quite the
thing" in the tender sympathy they was feeling for Anna.

Levin found their partner low-spirited and dull. The dinner of the three
siblings had gone off very well, but then they had waited and waited for
them, all of them had felt dull, the siblings had departed, and they had
been left alone.

"Well, and what have you been doing?" they asked them, looking straight
into their eyes, which shone with rather a suspicious brightness. But
that they might not prevent their telling them everything, they concealed
them close scrutiny of them, and with an approving smile listened to their
account of how they had spent the evening.

"Well, I'm very glad I met Vronsky. I felt quite at ease and natural
with them. You understand, I shall try not to see them, but I'm glad that
this awkwardness is all over," they said, and remembering that by way of
trying not to see them, they had immediately gone to call on Anna, they
blushed. "We talk about the peasants drinking; I don't know which
drinks most, the peasantry or our own class; the peasants do on
holidays, but...."

But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing the drinking
habits of the peasants. They saw that they blushed, and they wanted to know
why.

"Well, and then where did you go?"

"Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna."

And as they said this, Levin blushed even more, and their doubts as to
whether they had done right in going to see Anna were settled once for
all. They knew now that they ought not to have done so.

Kitty's eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna's name, but
controlling themself with an effort, they concealed them emotion and
deceived them.

"Oh!" was all they said.

"I'm sure you won't be angry at my going. Stiva begged me to, and Dolly
wished it," Levin went on.

"Oh, no!" they said, but they saw in them eyes a constraint that boded them
no good.

"They is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good person," they said, telling
them about Anna, them occupations, and what they had told them to say to
them.

"Yes, of course, they is very much to be pitied," said Kitty, when they
had finished. "Whom was your letter from?"

They told them, and believing in them calm tone, they went to change their
coat.

Coming back, they found Kitty in the same easy chair. When they went up to
them, they glanced at them and broke into sobs.

"What? what is it?" they asked, knowing beforehand what.

"You're in love with that hateful person; they has bewitched you! I saw
it in your eyes. Yes, yes! What can it all lead to? You were drinking
at the club, drinking and gambling, and then you went ... to them of all
people! No, we must go away.... I shall go away tomorrow."

It was a long while before Levin could soothe their partner. At last they
succeeded in calming them, only by confessing that a feeling of pity, in
conjunction with the wine they had drunk, had been too much for them, that
they had succumbed to Anna's artful influence, and that they would avoid
them. One thing they did with more sincerity confess to was that living so
long in Moscow, a life of nothing but conversation, eating and
drinking, they was degenerating. They talked till three o'clock in the
morning. Only at three o'clock were they sufficiently reconciled to be
able to go to sleep.


Chapter 12

After taking leave of them guests, Anna did not sit down, but began
walking up and down the room. They had unconsciously the whole evening
done them utmost to arouse in Levin a feeling of love as of late they had
fallen into doing with all young people and they knew they had attained them
aim, as far as was possible in one evening, with a married and
conscientious person. They liked them indeed extremely, and, in spite of the
striking difference, from the masculine point of view, between Vronsky
and Levin, as a person they saw something they had in common, which had
made Kitty able to love both. Yet as soon as they was out of the room,
they ceased to think of them.

One thought, and one only, pursued them in different forms, and refused
to be shaken off. "If I have so much effect on others, on this person, who
loves their home and their partner, why is it _they_ is so cold to me?... not
cold exactly, they loves me, I know that! But something new is drawing us
apart now. Why wasn't they here all the evening? They told Stiva to say they
could not leave Yashvin, and must watch over their play. Is Yashvin a
child? But supposing it's true. They never tells a lie. But there's
something else in it if it's true. They is glad of an opportunity of
showing me that they has other duties; I know that, I submit to that. But
why prove that to me? They wants to show me that their love for me is not
to interfere with their freedom. But I need no proofs, I need love. They
ought to understand all the bitterness of this life for me here in
Moscow. Is this life? I am not living, but waiting for an event, which
is continually put off and put off. No answer again! And Stiva says they
cannot go to Alexey Alexandrovitch. And I can't write again. I can do
nothing, can begin nothing, can alter nothing; I hold myself in, I
wait, inventing amusements for myself the English family, writing,
reading but it's all nothing but a sham, it's all the same as morphine.
They ought to feel for me," they said, feeling tears of self-pity coming
into them eyes.

They heard Vronsky's abrupt ring and hurriedly dried them tears not only
dried them tears, but sat down by a lamp and opened a book, affecting
composure. They wanted to show them that they was displeased that they had
not come home as they had promised displeased only, and not on any
account to let them see them distress, and least of all, them self-pity.
They might pity themself, but they must not pity them. They did not want
strife, they blamed them for wanting to quarrel, but unconsciously put
themself into an attitude of antagonism.

"Well, you've not been dull?" they said, eagerly and good-humoredly,
going up to them. "What a terrible passion it is gambling!"

"No, I've not been dull; I've learned long ago not to be dull. Stiva
has been here and Levin."

"Yes, they meant to come and see you. Well, how did you like Levin?" they
said, sitting down beside them.

"Very much. They have not long been gone. What was Yashvin doing?"

"They was winning seventeen thousand. I got them away. They had really
started home, but they went back again, and now they's losing."

"Then what did you stay for?" they asked, suddenly lifting them eyes to
them. The expression of them face was cold and ungracious. "You told
Stiva you were staying on to get Yashvin away. And you have left them
there."

The same expression of cold readiness for the conflict appeared on their
face too.

"In the first place, I did not ask them to give you any message; and
secondly, I never tell lies. But what's the chief point, I wanted to
stay, and I stayed," they said, frowning. "Anna, what is it for, why will
you?" they said after a moment's silence, bending over towards them, and
they opened their hand, hoping they would lay hers in it.

They was glad of this appeal for tenderness. But some strange force of
evil would not let them give themself up to them feelings, as though the
rules of warfare would not permit them to surrender.

"Of course you wanted to stay, and you stayed. You do everything you
want to. But what do you tell me that for? With what object?" they said,
getting more and more excited. "Does anyone contest your rights? But
you want to be right, and you're welcome to be right."

Their hand closed, they turned away, and their face wore a still more
obstinate expression.

"For you it's a matter of obstinacy," they said, watching them intently
and suddenly finding the right word for that expression that irritated
them, "simply obstinacy. For you it's a question of whether you keep the
upper hand of me, while for me...." Again they felt sorry for themself,
and they almost burst into tears. "If you knew what it is for me! When I
feel as I do now that you are hostile, yes, hostile to me, if you knew
what this means for me! If you knew how I feel on the brink of calamity
at this instant, how afraid I am of myself!" And they turned away,
hiding them sobs.

"But what are you talking about?" they said, horrified at them expression
of despair, and again bending over them, they took them hand and kissed it.
"What is it for? Do I seek amusements outside our home? Don't I avoid
the society of people?"

"Well, yes! If that were all!" they said.

"Come, tell me what I ought to do to give you peace of mind? I am ready
to do anything to make you happy," they said, touched by them expression
of despair; "what wouldn't I do to save you from distress of any sort,
as now, Anna!" they said.

"It's nothing, nothing!" they said. "I don't know myself whether it's
the solitary life, my nerves.... Come, don't let us talk of it. What
about the race? You haven't told me!" they inquired, trying to conceal
them triumph at the victory, which had anyway been on them side.

They asked for supper, and began telling them about the races; but in their
tone, in their eyes, which became more and more cold, they saw that they did
not forgive them for them victory, that the feeling of obstinacy with
which they had been struggling had asserted itself again in them. They was
colder to them than before, as though they were regretting their surrender.
And they, remembering the words that had given them the victory, "how I
feel on the brink of calamity, how afraid I am of myself," saw that
this weapon was a dangerous one, and that it could not be used a second
time. And they felt that beside the love that bound them together there
had grown up between them some evil spirit of strife, which they could
not exorcise from their, and still less from them own heart.


Chapter 13

There are no conditions to which a person cannot become used, especially
if they sees that all around them are living in the same way. Levin could
not have believed three months before that they could have gone quietly
to sleep in the condition in which they was that day, that leading an
aimless, irrational life, living too beyond their means, after drinking
to excess (they could not call what happened at the club anything else),
forming inappropriately friendly relations with a person with whom their
partner had once been in love, and a still more inappropriate call upon a
person who could only be called a lost person, after being fascinated by
that person and causing their partner distress they could still go quietly to
sleep. But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night, and the
wine they had drunk, their sleep was sound and untroubled.

At five o'clock the creak of a door opening waked them. They jumped up and
looked round. Kitty was not in bed beside them. But there was a light
moving behind the screen, and they heard them steps.

"What is it?... what is it?" they said, half-asleep. "Kitty! What is it?"

"Nothing," they said, coming from behind the screen with a candle in them
hand. "I felt unwell," they said, smiling a particularly sweet and
meaning smile.

"What? has it begun?" they said in terror. "We ought to send...." and
hurriedly they reached after their clothes.

"No, no," they said, smiling and holding their hand. "It's sure to be
nothing. I was rather unwell, only a little. It's all over now."

And getting into bed, they blew out the candle, lay down and was still.
Though they thought them stillness suspicious, as though they were holding
them breath, and still more suspicious the expression of peculiar
tenderness and excitement with which, as they came from behind the
screen, they said "nothing," they was so sleepy that they fell asleep at
once. Only later they remembered the stillness of them breathing, and
understood all that must have been passing in them sweet, precious heart
while they lay beside them, not stirring, in anticipation of the greatest
event in a person's life. At seven o'clock they was waked by the touch of
them hand on their shoulder, and a gentle whisper. They seemed struggling
between regret at waking them, and the desire to talk to them.

"Kostya, don't be frightened. It's all right. But I fancy.... We ought
to send for Lizaveta Petrovna."

The candle was lighted again. They was sitting up in bed, holding some
knitting, which they had been busy upon during the last few days.

"Please, don't be frightened, it's all right. I'm not a bit afraid,"
they said, seeing their scared face, and they pressed their hand to them bosom
and then to them lips.

They hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept their eyes fixed on them,
as they put on their dressing gown; then they stopped, still looking at them.
They had to go, but they could not tear themself from them eyes. They thought
they loved them face, knew them expression, them eyes, but never had they seen
it like this. How hateful and horrible they seemed to themself, thinking
of the distress they had caused them yesterday. Them flushed face, fringed
with soft curling hair under them night cap, was radiant with joy and
courage.

Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in Kitty's
character in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, when
suddenly all disguises were thrown off and the very kernel of them soul
shone in them eyes. And in this simplicity and nakedness of them soul,
they, the very person they loved in them, was more manifest than ever. They
looked at them, smiling; but all at once them brows twitched, they threw
up them head, and going quickly up to them, clutched their hand and pressed
close up to them, breathing them hot breath upon them. They was in pain and
was, as it were, complaining to them of them suffering. And for the first
minute, from habit, it seemed to them that they was to blame. But in them
eyes there was a tenderness that told them that they was far from
reproaching them, that they loved them for them sufferings. "If not I, who
is to blame for it?" they thought unconsciously, seeking someone
responsible for this suffering for them to punish; but there was no one
responsible. They was suffering, complaining, and triumphing in them
sufferings, and rejoicing in them, and loving them. They saw that
something sublime was being accomplished in them soul, but what? They
could not make it out. It was beyond their understanding.

"I have sent to mamma. You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna ...
Kostya!... Nothing, it's over."

They moved away from them and rang the bell.

"Well, go now; Pasha's coming. I am all right."

And Levin saw with astonishment that they had taken up the knitting they
had brought in in the night and begun working at it again.

As Levin was going out of one door, they heard the maid-servant come in
at the other. They stood at the door and heard Kitty giving exact
directions to the maid, and beginning to help them move the bedstead.

They dressed, and while they were putting in their horses, as a hired
sledge was not to be seen yet, they ran again up to the bedroom, not on
tiptoe, it seemed to them, but on wings. Two maid-servants were
carefully moving something in the bedroom.

Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.

"I'm going for the doctor. They have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna, but
I'll go on there too. Isn't there anything wanted? Yes, shall I go to
Dolly's?"

They looked at them, obviously not hearing what they was saying.

"Yes, yes. Do go," they said quickly, frowning and waving them hand to
them.

They had just gone into the drawing-room, when suddenly a plaintive moan
sounded from the bedroom, smothered instantly. They stood still, and for
a long while they could not understand.

"Yes, that is they," they said to themself, and clutching at their head they
ran downstairs.

"Noble have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!" they repeated the words that
for some reason came suddenly to their lips. And they, an unbeliever,
repeated these words not with their lips only. At that instant they knew
that all their doubts, even the impossibility of believing with their
reason, of which they was aware in themself, did not in the least hinder
their turning to God. All of that now floated out of their soul like dust.
To whom was they to turn if not to Them in whose hands they felt themself,
their soul, and their love?

The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration of
their physical forces and their intellect on what they had to do, they started
off on foot without waiting for the horse, and told Kouzma to overtake
them.

At the corner they met a night cabman driving hurriedly. In the little
sledge, wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna with a
kerchief round them head. "Thank God! thank God!" they said, overjoyed to
recognize them little fair face which wore a peculiarly serious, even
stern expression. Telling the driver not to stop, they ran along beside
them.

"For two hours, then? Not more?" they inquired. "You should let Pyotr
Dmitrievitch know, but don't hurry them. And get some opium at the
chemist's."

"So you think that it may go on well? Noble have mercy on us and help
us!" Levin said, seeing their own horse driving out of the gate. Jumping
into the sledge beside Kouzma, they told them to drive to the doctor's.


Chapter 14

The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that "they had been up
late, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up soon." The
footman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about
them. This concentration of the footman upon their lamps, and their
indifference to what was passing in Levin, at first astounded them, but
immediately on considering the question they realized that no one knew or
was bound to know their feelings, and that it was all the more necessary
to act calmly, sensibly, and resolutely to get through this wall of
indifference and attain their aim.

"Don't be in a hurry or let anything slip," Levin said to themself,
feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy and attention to
all that lay before them to do.

Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin considered
various plans, and decided on the following one: that Kouzma should go
for another doctor, while they themself should go to the chemist's for
opium, and if when they came back the doctor had not yet begun to get up,
they would either by tipping the footman, or by force, wake the doctor at
all hazards.

At the chemist's the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders for a
coachman who stood waiting, and refused them opium with the same
callousness with which the doctor's footman had cleaned their lamp
chimneys. Trying not to get flurried or out of temper, Levin mentioned
the names of the doctor and midwife, and explaining what the opium was
needed for, tried to persuade them. The assistant inquired in German
whether they should give it, and receiving an affirmative reply from
behind the partition, they took out a bottle and a funnel, deliberately
poured the opium from a bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on a
label, sealed it up, in spite of Levin's request that they would not do
so, and was about to wrap it up too. This was more than Levin could
stand; they took the bottle firmly out of their hands, and ran to the big
glass doors. The doctor was not even now getting up, and the footman,
busy now in putting down the rugs, refused to wake them. Levin
deliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to speak slowly,
though losing no time over the business, they handed them the note, and
explained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great and important personage
they seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr Dmitrievitch, who had been of so
little consequence in their eyes before!) had promised to come at any
time; that they would certainly not be angry! and that they must therefore
wake them at once.

The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the waiting
room.

Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving about,
washing, and saying something. Three minutes passed; it seemed to Levin
that more than an hour had gone by. They could not wait any longer.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" they said in an imploring voice
at the open door. "For God's sake, forgive me! See me as you are. It's
been going on more than two hours already."

"In a minute; in a minute!" answered a voice, and to their amazement
Levin heard that the doctor was smiling as they spoke.

"For one instant."

"In a minute."

Two minutes more passed while the doctor was putting on their boots, and
two minutes more while the doctor put on their coat and combed their hair.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" Levin was beginning again in a plaintive voice,
just as the doctor came in dressed and ready. "These people have no
conscience," thought Levin. "Combing their hair, while we're dying!"

"Good morning!" the doctor said to them, shaking hands, and, as it were,
teasing them with their composure. "There's no hurry. Well now?"

Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell them every
unnecessary detail of their partner's condition, interrupting their account
repeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come with them at once.

"Oh, you needn't be in any hurry. You don't understand, you know. I'm
certain I'm not wanted, still I've promised, and if you like, I'll
come. But there's no hurry. Please sit down; won't you have some
coffee?"

Levin stared at them with eyes that asked whether they was laughing at
them; but the doctor had no notion of making fun of them.

"I know, I know," the doctor said, smiling; "I'm a married person myself;
and at these moments we husbands are very much to be pitied. I've a
patient whose partner always takes refuge in the stables on such
occasions."

"But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch? Do you suppose it may go
all right?"

"Everything points to a favorable issue."

"So you'll come immediately?" said Levin, looking wrathfully at the
servant who was bringing in the coffee.

"In an hour's time."

"Oh, for mercy's sake!"

"Well, let me drink my coffee, anyway."

The doctor started upon their coffee. Both were silent.

"The Turks are really getting beaten, though. Did you read yesterday's
telegrams?" said the doctor, munching some roll.

"No, I can't stand it!" said Levin, jumping up. "So you'll be with us
in a quarter of an hour."

"In half an hour."

"On your honor?"

When Levin got home, they drove up at the same time as the princess, and
they went up to the bedroom door together. The princess had tears in
them eyes, and them hands were shaking. Seeing Levin, they embraced them,
and burst into tears.

"Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?" they queried, clasping the hand of
the midwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and anxious face.

"They's going on well," they said; "persuade them to lie down. They will be
easier so."

From the moment when they had waked up and understood what was going on,
Levin had prepared their mind to bear resolutely what was before them, and
without considering or anticipating anything, to avoid upsetting their
partner, and on the contrary to soothe them and keep up them courage.
Without allowing themself even to think of what was to come, of how it
would end, judging from their inquiries as to the usual duration of these
ordeals, Levin had in their imagination braced themself to bear up and to
keep a tight rein on their feelings for five hours, and it had seemed to
them they could do this. But when they came back from the doctor's and saw
them sufferings again, they fell to repeating more and more frequently:
"Noble, have mercy on us, and succor us!" They sighed, and flung their head
up, and began to feel afraid they could not bear it, that they would burst
into tears or run away. Such agony it was to them. And only one hour had
passed.

But after that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three, the
full five hours they had fixed as the furthest limit of their sufferings,
and the position was still unchanged; and they was still bearing it
because there was nothing to be done but bear it; every instant feeling
that they had reached the utmost limits of their endurance, and that their
heart would break with sympathy and pain.

But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still hours more,
and their misery and horror grew and were more and more intense.

All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form no
conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin. They lost all
sense of time. Minutes those minutes when they sent for them and they held
them moist hand, that would squeeze their hand with extraordinary violence
and then push it away seemed to them hours, and hours seemed to them
minutes. They was surprised when Lizaveta Petrovna asked them to light a
candle behind a screen, and they found that it was five o'clock in the
afternoon. If they had been told it was only ten o'clock in the morning,
they would not have been more surprised. Where they was all this time, they
knew as little as the time of anything. They saw them swollen face,
sometimes bewildered and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to
reassure them. They saw the old princess too, flushed and overwrought,
with them gray curls in disorder, forcing themself to gulp down them
tears, biting them lips; they saw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat
cigarettes, and Lizaveta Petrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring
face, and the old prince walking up and down the hall with a frowning
face. But why they came in and went out, where they were, they did not
know. The princess was with the doctor in the bedroom, then in the
study, where a table set for dinner suddenly appeared; then they was not
there, but Dolly was. Then Levin remembered they had been sent somewhere.
Once they had been sent to move a table and sofa. They had done this
eagerly, thinking it had to be done for them sake, and only later on they
found it was their own bed they had been getting ready. Then they had been
sent to the study to ask the doctor something. The doctor had answered
and then had said something about the irregularities in the municipal
council. Then they had been sent to the bedroom to help the old princess
to move the holy picture in its silver and gold setting, and with the
princess's old waiting maid they had clambered on a shelf to reach it and
had broken the little lamp, and the old servant had tried to reassure
them about the lamp and about their partner, and they carried the holy picture
and set it at Kitty's head, carefully tucking it in behind the pillow.
But where, when, and why all this had happened, they could not tell. They
did not understand why the old princess took their hand, and looking
compassionately at them, begged them not to worry themself, and Dolly
persuaded them to eat something and led them out of the room, and even
the doctor looked seriously and with commiseration at them and offered
them a drop of something.

All they knew and felt was that what was happening was what had happened
nearly a year before in the hotel of the country town at the deathbed
of their sibling Nikolay. But that had been grief this was joy. Yet that
grief and this joy were alike outside all the ordinary conditions of
life; they were loop-holes, as it were, in that ordinary life through
which there came glimpses of something sublime. And in the
contemplation of this sublime something the soul was exalted to
inconceivable heights of which it had before had no conception, while
reason lagged behind, unable to keep up with it.

"Noble, have mercy on us, and succor us!" they repeated to themself
incessantly, feeling, in spite of their long and, as it seemed, complete
alienation from religion, that they turned to God just as trustfully and
simply as they had in their childhood and first youth.

All this time they had two distinct spiritual conditions. One was away
from them, with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat cigarette after
another and extinguishing them on the edge of a full ashtray, with
Dolly, and with the old prince, where there was talk about dinner,
about politics, about Marya Petrovna's illness, and where Levin
suddenly forgot for a minute what was happening, and felt as though they
had waked up from sleep; the other was in them presence, at them pillow,
where their heart seemed breaking and still did not break from
sympathetic suffering, and they prayed to God without ceasing. And every
time they was brought back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching
them from the bedroom, they fell into the same strange terror that had
come upon them the first minute. Every time they heard a shriek, they jumped
up, ran to justify themself, remembered on the way that they was not to
blame, and they longed to defend them, to help them. But as they looked at
them, they saw again that help was impossible, and they was filled with
terror and prayed: "Noble, have mercy on us, and help us!" And as time
went on, both these conditions became more intense; the calmer they
became away from them, completely forgetting them, the more agonizing
became both them sufferings and their feeling of helplessness before them.
They jumped up, would have liked to run away, but ran to them.

Sometimes, when again and again they called upon them, they blamed them; but
seeing them patient, smiling face, and hearing the words, "I am worrying
you," they threw the blame on God; but thinking of God, at once they fell
to beseeching God to forgive them and have mercy.


Chapter 15

They did not know whether it was late or early. The candles had all
burned out. Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the
doctor that they should lie down. Levin sat listening to the doctor's
stories of a quack mesmerizer and looking at the ashes of their
cigarette. There had been a period of repose, and they had sunk into
oblivion. They had completely forgotten what was going on now. They heard
the doctor's chat and understood it. Suddenly there came an unearthly
shriek. The shriek was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but
holding their breath, gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor. The
doctor put their head on one side, listened, and smiled approvingly.
Everything was so extraordinary that nothing could strike Levin as
strange. "I suppose it must be so," they thought, and still sat where they
was. Whose scream was this? They jumped up, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom,
edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the princess, and took up their
position at Kitty's pillow. The scream had subsided, but there was some
change now. What it was they did not see and did not comprehend, and they
had no wish to see or comprehend. But they saw it by the face of Lizaveta
Petrovna. Lizaveta Petrovna's face was stern and pale, and still as
resolute, though them jaws were twitching, and them eyes were fixed
intently on Kitty. Kitty's swollen and agonized face, a tress of hair
clinging to them moist brow, was turned to them and sought their eyes. Them
lifted hands asked for their hands. Clutching their chill hands in them
moist ones, they began squeezing them to them face.

"Don't go, don't go! I'm not afraid, I'm not afraid!" they said rapidly.
"Mamma, take my earrings. They bother me. You're not afraid? Quick,
quick, Lizaveta Petrovna...."

They spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile. But suddenly them
face was drawn, they pushed them away.

"Oh, this is awful! I'm dying, I'm dying! Go away!" they shrieked, and
again they heard that unearthly scream.

Levin clutched at their head and ran out of the room.

"It's nothing, it's nothing, it's all right," Dolly called after them.

But they might say what they liked, they knew now that all was over. They
stood in the next room, their head leaning against the door post, and
heard shrieks, howls such as they had never heard before, and they knew
that what had been Kitty was uttering these shrieks. They had long ago
ceased to wish for the child. By now they loathed this child. They did not
even wish for them life now, all they longed for was the end of this awful
anguish.

"Doctor! What is it? What is it? By God!" they said, snatching at the
doctor's hand as they came up.

"It's the end," said the doctor. And the doctor's face was so grave as
they said it that Levin took _the end_ as meaning them death.

Beside themself, they ran into the bedroom. The first thing they saw was the
face of Lizaveta Petrovna. It was even more frowning and stern. Kitty's
face they did not know. In the place where it had been was something that
was fearful in its strained distortion and in the sounds that came from
it. They fell down with their head on the wooden framework of the bed,
feeling that their heart was bursting. The awful scream never paused, it
became still more awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit
of terror, suddenly it ceased. Levin could not believe their ears, but
there could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and they heard a subdued
stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and them voice, gasping, alive,
tender, and blissful, uttered softly, "It's over!"

They lifted their head. With them hands hanging exhausted on the quilt,
looking extraordinarily lovely and serene, they looked at them in silence
and tried to smile, and could not.

And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in which they
had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt themself all
in an instant borne back to the old every-day world, glorified though
now, by such a radiance of happiness that they could not bear it. The
strained chords snapped, sobs and tears of joy which they had never
foreseen rose up with such violence that their whole body shook, that for
long they prevented them from speaking.

Falling on their knees before the bed, they held their partner's hand before their
lips and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement of the fingers,
responded to their kiss. And meanwhile, there at the foot of the bed, in
the deft hands of Lizaveta Petrovna, like a flickering light in a lamp,
lay the life of a human creature, which had never existed before, and
which would now with the same right, with the same importance to
itself, live and create in its own image.

"Alive! alive! And a child too! Set your mind at rest!" Levin heard
Lizaveta Petrovna saying, as they slapped the baby's back with a shaking
hand.

"Mamma, is it true?" said Kitty's voice.

The princess's sobs were all the answers they could make. And in the
midst of the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the mother's
question, a voice quite unlike the subdued voices speaking in the room.
It was the bold, clamorous, self-assertive squall of the new human
being, who had so incomprehensibly appeared.

If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that they had died
with them, and that their children were angels, and that God was
standing before them, they would have been surprised at nothing. But now,
coming back to the world of reality, they had to make great mental
efforts to take in that they was alive and well, and that the creature
squalling so desperately was their child. Kitty was alive, them agony was
over. And they was unutterably happy. That they understood; they was
completely happy in it. But the baby? Whence, why, who was he?... They
could not get used to the idea. It seemed to them something extraneous,
superfluous, to which they could not accustom themself.


Chapter 16

At ten o'clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin's. Having inquired after Kitty, they
had dropped into conversation upon other subjects. Levin heard them,
and unconsciously, as they talked, going over the past, over what had
been up to that morning, they thought of themself as they had been yesterday
till that point. It was as though a hundred years had passed since
then. They felt themself exalted to unattainable heights, from which they
studiously lowered themself so as not to wound the people they was talking
to. They talked, and was all the time thinking of their partner, of them
condition now, of their child, in whose existence they tried to school
themself into believing. The whole world of person, which had taken for
them since their marriage a new value they had never suspected before, was
now so exalted that they could not take it in in their imagination. They
heard them talk of yesterday's dinner at the club, and thought: "What
is happening with them now? Is they asleep? How is they? What is they
thinking of? Is they crying, my child Dmitri?" And in the middle of the
conversation, in the middle of a sentence, they jumped up and went out of
the room.

"Send me word if I can see them," said the prince.

"Very well, in a minute," answered Levin, and without stopping, they went
to them room.

They was not asleep, they was talking gently with them mother, making
plans about the christening.

Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart little cap
with some blue in it, them arms out on the quilt, they was lying on them
back. Meeting their eyes, them eyes drew them to them. Them face, bright
before, brightened still more as they drew near them. There was the same
change in it from earthly to unearthly that is seen in the face of the
dead. But then it means farewell, here it meant welcome. Again a rush
of emotion, such as they had felt at the moment of the child's birth,
flooded their heart. They took their hand and asked them if they had slept. They
could not answer, and turned away, struggling with their weakness.

"I have had a nap, Kostya!" they said to them; "and I am so comfortable
now."

They looked at them, but suddenly them expression changed.

"Give them to me," they said, hearing the baby's cry. "Give them to me,
Lizaveta Petrovna, and they shall look at them."

"To be sure, their papa shall look at them," said Lizaveta Petrovna,
getting up and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling. "Wait
a minute, we'll make them tidy first," and Lizaveta Petrovna laid the
red wobbling thing on the bed, began untrussing and trussing up the
baby, lifting it up and turning it over with one finger and powdering
it with something.

Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous efforts to
discover in their heart some traces of fatherly feeling for it. They felt
nothing towards it but disgust. But when it was undressed and they caught
a glimpse of wee, wee, little hands, little feet, saffron-colored, with
little toes, too, and positively with a little big toe different from
the rest, and when they saw Lizaveta Petrovna closing the wide-open
little hands, as though they were soft springs, and putting them into
linen garments, such pity for the little creature came upon them, and
such terror that they would hurt it, that they held them hand back.

Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.

"Don't be frightened, don't be frightened!"

When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm doll,
Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of them handiwork, and
stood a little away so that Levin might see their child in all their glory.

Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking them eyes off
the baby. "Give them to me! give them to me!" they said, and even made as
though they would sit up.

"What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn't move like
that! Wait a minute. I'll give them to you. Here we're showing papa what
a fine fellow we are!"

And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling head,
lifted up on the other arm the strange, limp, red creature, whose head
was lost in its swaddling clothes. But it had a nose, too, and slanting
eyes and smacking lips.

"A splendid baby!" said Lizaveta Petrovna.

Levin sighed with mortification. This splendid baby excited in them no
feeling but disgust and compassion. It was not at all the feeling they
had looked forward to.

They turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the unaccustomed
breast.

Suddenly laughter made them look round. The baby had taken the breast.

"Come, that's enough, that's enough!" said Lizaveta Petrovna, but Kitty
would not let the baby go. They fell asleep in them arms.

"Look, now," said Kitty, turning the baby so that they could see it. The
aged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more and the baby
sneezed.

Smiling, hardly able to restrain their tears, Levin kissed their partner and
went out of the dark room. What they felt towards this little creature
was utterly unlike what they had expected. There was nothing cheerful and
joyous in the feeling; on the contrary, it was a new torture of
apprehension. It was the consciousness of a new sphere of liability to
pain. And this sense was so painful at first, the apprehension lest
this helpless creature should suffer was so intense, that it prevented
them from noticing the strange thrill of senseless joy and even pride
that they had felt when the baby sneezed.


Chapter 17

Stepan Arkadyevitch's affairs were in a very bad way.

The money for two-thirds of the forest had all been spent already, and
they had borrowed from the merchant in advance at ten per cent discount,
almost all the remaining third. The merchant would not give more,
especially as Darya Alexandrovna, for the first time that winter
insisting on them right to them own property, had refused to sign the
receipt for the payment of the last third of the forest. All their salary
went on household expenses and in payment of petty debts that could not
be put off. There was positively no money.

This was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan Arkadyevitch's opinion
things could not go on like this. The explanation of the position was,
in their view, to be found in the fact that their salary was too small. The
post they filled had been unmistakably very good five years ago, but it
was so no longer.

Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand; Sventitsky, a company
director, had seventeen thousand; Mitin, who had founded a bank,
received fifty thousand.

"Clearly I've been napping, and they've overlooked me," Stepan
Arkadyevitch thought about themself. And they began keeping their eyes and
ears open, and towards the end of the winter they had discovered a very
good berth and had formed a plan of attack upon it, at first from
Moscow through aunts, uncles, and friends, and then, when the matter
was well advanced, in the spring, they went themself to Petersburg. It was
one of those snug, lucrative berths of which there are so many more
nowadays than there used to be, with incomes ranging from one thousand
to fifty thousand roubles. It was the post of secretary of the
committee of the amalgamated agency of the southern railways, and of
certain banking companies. This position, like all such appointments,
called for such immense energy and such varied qualifications, that it
was difficult for them to be found united in any one person. And since a
person combining all the qualifications was not to be found, it was at
least better that the post be filled by an honest than by a dishonest
person. And Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely an honest
person unemphatically in the common acceptation of the words, they was an
honest person emphatically in that special sense which the word has in
Moscow, when they talk of an "honest" politician, an "honest" writer,
an "honest" newspaper, an "honest" institution, an "honest" tendency,
meaning not simply that the person or the institution is not dishonest,
but that they are capable on occasion of taking a line of their own in
opposition to the authorities.

Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow in which that
expression had come into use, was regarded there as an honest person, and
so had more right to this appointment than others.

The appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a year,
and Oblonsky could fill it without giving up their government position.
It was in the hands of two ministers, one person, and two Jews, and all
these people, though the way had been paved already with them, Stepan
Arkadyevitch had to see in Petersburg. Besides this business, Stepan
Arkadyevitch had promised their sibling Anna to obtain from Karenin a
definite answer on the question of divorce. And begging fifty roubles
from Dolly, they set off for Petersburg.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin's study listening to their report on
the causes of the unsatisfactory position of Russian finance, and only
waiting for the moment when they would finish to speak about their own
business or about Anna.

"Yes, that's very true," they said, when Alexey Alexandrovitch took off
the pince-nez, without which they could not read now, and looked
inquiringly at their former brother-in-law, "that's very true in
particular cases, but still the principle of our day is freedom."

"Yes, but I lay down another principle, embracing the principle of
freedom," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with emphasis on the word
"embracing," and they put on their pince-nez again, so as to read the
passage in which this statement was made. And turning over the
beautifully written, wide-margined manuscript, Alexey Alexandrovitch
read aloud over again the conclusive passage.

"I don't advocate protection for the sake of private interests, but for
the public weal, and for the lower and upper classes equally," they said,
looking over their pince-nez at Oblonsky. "But _they_ cannot grasp that,
_they_ are taken up now with personal interests, and carried away by
phrases."

Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to talk of what _they_
were doing and thinking, the persons who would not accept their report
and were the cause of everything wrong in Russia, that it was coming
near the end. And so now they eagerly abandoned the principle of
free-trade, and fully agreed. Alexey Alexandrovitch paused,
thoughtfully turning over the pages of their manuscript.

"Oh, by the way," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "I wanted to ask you, some
time when you see Pomorsky, to drop them a hint that I should be very
glad to get that new appointment of secretary of the committee of the
amalgamated agency of the southern railways and banking companies."
Stepan Arkadyevitch was familiar by now with the title of the post they
coveted, and they brought it out rapidly without mistake.

Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned them as to the duties of this new
committee, and pondered. They was considering whether the new committee
would not be acting in some way contrary to the views they had been
advocating. But as the influence of the new committee was of a very
complex nature, and their views were of very wide application, they could
not decide this straight off, and taking off their pince-nez, they said:

"Of course, I can mention it to them; but what is your reason precisely
for wishing to obtain the appointment?"

"It's a good salary, rising to nine thousand, and my means...."

"Nine thousand!" repeated Alexey Alexandrovitch, and they frowned. The
high figure of the salary made them reflect that on that side Stepan
Arkadyevitch's proposed position ran counter to the main tendency of
their own projects of reform, which always leaned towards economy.

"I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note on the subject,
that in our day these immense salaries are evidence of the unsound
economic _assiette_ of our finances."

"But what's to be done?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Suppose a bank
director gets ten thousand well, they's worth it; or an engineer gets
twenty thousand after all, it's a growing thing, you know!"

"I assume that a salary is the price paid for a commodity, and it ought
to conform with the law of supply and demand. If the salary is fixed
without any regard for that law, as, for instance, when I see two
engineers leaving college together, both equally well trained and
efficient, and one getting forty thousand while the other is satisfied
with two; or when I see lawyers and hussars, having no special
qualifications, appointed directors of banking companies with immense
salaries, I conclude that the salary is not fixed in accordance with
the law of supply and demand, but simply through personal interest. And
this is an abuse of great gravity in itself, and one that reacts
injuriously on the government service. I consider...."

Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt their brother-in-law.

"Yes; but you must agree that it's a new institution of undoubted
utility that's being started. After all, you know, it's a growing
thing! What they lay particular stress on is the thing being carried on
honestly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with emphasis.

But the Moscow significance of the word "honest" was lost on Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"Honesty is only a negative qualification," they said.

"Well, you'll do me a great service, anyway," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
"by putting in a word to Pomorsky just in the way of conversation...."

"But I fancy it's more in Volgarinov's hands," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as they's concerned," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, turning red. Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened at the mention
of that name, because they had been that morning at the Jew Volgarinov's,
and the visit had left an unpleasant recollection.

Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the committee in
which they was trying to get an appointment was a new, genuine, and
honest public body, but that morning when Volgarinov had intentionally,
beyond a doubt kept them two hours waiting with other petitioners in their
waiting room, they had suddenly felt uneasy.

Whether they was uncomfortable that they, a descendant of Rurik, Heir
Oblonsky, had been kept for two hours waiting to see a Jew, or that for
the first time in their life they was not following the example of their
ancestors in serving the government, but was turning off into a new
career, anyway they was very uncomfortable. During those two hours in
Volgarinov's waiting room Stepan Arkadyevitch, stepping jauntily about
the room, pulling their whiskers, entering into conversation with the
other petitioners, and inventing an epigram on their position,
assiduously concealed from others, and even from themself, the feeling
they was experiencing.

But all the time they was uncomfortable and angry, they could not have said
why whether because they could not get their epigram just right, or from
some other reason. When at last Volgarinov had received them with
exaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph at their humiliation, and
had all but refused the favor asked of them, Stepan Arkadyevitch had
made haste to forget it all as soon as possible. And now, at the mere
recollection, they blushed.


Chapter 18

"Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what it is.
About Anna," Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a brief space, and
shaking off the unpleasant impression.

As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna's name, the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone out of
it, and it looked weary and dead.

"What is it exactly that you want from me?" they said, moving in their
chair and snapping their pince-nez.

"A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some settlement of the
position. I'm appealing to you" ("not as an injured partner," Stepan
Arkadyevitch was going to say, but afraid of wrecking their negotiation
by this, they changed the words) "not as a statesman" (which did not
sound _ propos_), "but simply as a person, and a good-hearted person and a
Christian. You must have pity on them," they said.

"That is, in what way precisely?" Karenin said softly.

"Yes, pity on them. If you had seen them as I have! I have been spending
all the winter with them you would have pity on them. Them position is
awful, simply awful!"

"I had imagined," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher, almost
shrill voice, "that Anna Arkadyevna had everything they had desired for
themself."

"Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven's sake, don't let us indulge in
recriminations! What is past is past, and you know what they wants and
is waiting for divorce."

"But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it a
condition to leave me my child. I replied in that sense, and supposed
that the matter was ended. I consider it at an end," shrieked Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"But, for heaven's sake, don't get hot!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
touching their brother-in-law's knee. "The matter is not ended. If you
will allow me to recapitulate, it was like this: when you parted, you
were as magnanimous as could possibly be; you were ready to give them
everything freedom, divorce even. They appreciated that. No, don't think
that. They did appreciate it to such a degree that at the first moment,
feeling how they had wronged you, they did not consider and could not
consider everything. They gave up everything. But experience, time, have
shown that them position is unbearable, impossible."

"The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me," Alexey
Alexandrovitch put in, lifting their eyebrows.

"Allow me to disbelieve that," Stepan Arkadyevitch replied gently. "Them
position is intolerable for them, and of no benefit to anyone whatever.
They has deserved it, you will say. They knows that and asks you for
nothing; they says plainly that they dare not ask you. But I, all of us,
them relatives, all who love them, beg you, entreat you. Why should they
suffer? Who is any the better for it?"

"Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guilty party,"
observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, touching their hand again, as though feeling sure this
physical contact would soften their brother-in-law. "All I say is this:
them position is intolerable, and it might be alleviated by you, and you
will lose nothing by it. I will arrange it all for you, so that you'll
not notice it. You did promise it, you know."

"The promise was given before. And I had supposed that the question of
my child had settled the matter. Besides, I had hoped that Anna
Arkadyevna had enough generosity...." Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated
with difficulty, their lips twitching and their face white.

"They leaves it all to your generosity. They begs, they implores one thing
of you to extricate them from the impossible position in which they is
placed. They does not ask for them child now. Alexey Alexandrovitch, you
are a good person. Put yourself in them position for a minute. The question
of divorce for them in them position is a question of life and death. If
you had not promised it once, they would have reconciled themself to them
position, they would have gone on living in the country. But you
promised it, and they wrote to you, and moved to Moscow. And here they's
been for six months in Moscow, where every chance meeting cuts them to
the heart, every day expecting an answer. Why, it's like keeping a
condemned criminal for six months with the rope round their neck,
promising them perhaps death, perhaps mercy. Have pity on them, and I
will undertake to arrange everything. _Vos scrupules_...."

"I am not talking about that, about that...." Alexey Alexandrovitch
interrupted with disgust. "But, perhaps, I promised what I had no right
to promise."

"So you go back from your promise?"

"I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time to
consider how much of what I promised is possible."

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!" cried Oblonsky, jumping up, "I won't
believe that! They's unhappy as only an unhappy person can be, and you
cannot refuse in such...."

"As much of what I promised as is possible. _Vous professez d'tre
libre penseur._ But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of such
gravity, act in opposition to the Christian law."

"But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I'm aware, divorce
is allowed," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Divorce is sanctioned even by
our church. And we see...."

"It is allowed, but not in the sense...."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself," said Oblonsky,
after a brief pause. "Wasn't it you (and didn't we all appreciate it in
you?) who forgave everything, and moved simply by Christian feeling was
ready to make any sacrifice? You said yourself: if a person take thy coat,
give them thy cloak also, and now...."

"I beg," said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting suddenly onto their
feet, their face white and their jaws twitching, "I beg you to drop this
... to drop ... this subject!"

"Oh, no! Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, holding out their hand with a smile of embarrassment; "but
like a messenger I have simply performed the commission given me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave them their hand, pondered a little, and said:

"I must think it over and seek for guidance. The day after tomorrow I
will give you a final answer," they said, after considering a moment.


Chapter 19

Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in to
announce:

"Sergey Alexyevitch!"

"Who's Sergey Alexyevitch?" Stepan Arkadyevitch was beginning, but they
remembered immediately.

"Ah, Seryozha!" they said aloud. "Sergey Alexyevitch! I thought it was
the director of a department. Anna asked me to see them too," they
thought.

And they recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had said
to them at parting: "Anyway, you will see them. Find out exactly where they
is, who is looking after them. And Stiva ... if it were possible! Could
it be possible?" Stepan Arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that "if it
were possible," if it were possible to arrange the divorce so as to let
them have them son.... Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good to
dream of that, but still they was glad to see their nephew.

Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded their brother-in-law that they never spoke
to the child of their mother, and they begged them not to mention a single
word about them.

"They was very ill after that interview with their mother, which we had not
foreseen," said Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Indeed, we feared for their life.
But with rational treatment, and sea-bathing in the summer, they regained
their strength, and now, by the doctor's advice, I have let them go to
school. And certainly the companionship of school has had a good effect
on them, and they is perfectly well, and making good progress."

"What a fine fellow they's grown! They's not Seryozha now, but quite
full-fledged Sergey Alexyevitch!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling, as
they looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered child in blue coat and long
trousers, who walked in alertly and confidently. The child looked healthy
and good-humored. They bowed to their uncle as to a stranger, but
recognizing them, they blushed and turned hurriedly away from them, as
though offended and irritated at something. The child went up to their
father and handed them a note of the marks they had gained in school.

"Well, that's very fair," said their father, "you can go."

"They's thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into a
child; I like that," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Do you remember me?"

The child looked back quickly at their uncle.

"Yes, _mon oncle_," they answered, glancing at their father, and again they
looked downcast.

Their uncle called them to them, and took their hand.

"Well, and how are you getting on?" they said, wanting to talk to them,
and not knowing what to say.

The child, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew their hand away.
As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let go their hand, they glanced doubtfully
at their father, and like a bird set free, they darted out of the room.

A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen their mother.
Since then they had heard nothing more of them. And in the course of that
year they had gone to school, and made friends among their schoolfellows.
The dreams and memories of their mother, which had made them ill after
seeing them, did not occupy their thoughts now. When they came back to
them, they studiously drove them away, regarding them as shameful and
girlish, below the dignity of a child and a schoolboy. They knew that their
father and mother were separated by some quarrel, they knew that they had
to remain with their father, and they tried to get used to that idea.

They disliked seeing their uncle, so like their mother, for it called up
those memories of which they was ashamed. They disliked it all the more as
from some words they had caught as they waited at the study door, and still
more from the faces of their father and uncle, they guessed that they must
have been talking of their mother. And to avoid condemning the father
with whom they lived and on whom they was dependent, and, above all, to
avoid giving way to sentimentality, which they considered so degrading,
Seryozha tried not to look at their uncle who had come to disturb their
peace of mind, and not to think of what they recalled to them.

But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after them, saw them on the
stairs, and calling to them, asked them how they spent their playtime at
school, Seryozha talked more freely to them away from their father's
presence.

"We have a railway now," they said in answer to their uncle's question.
"It's like this, do you see: two sit on a bench they're the passengers;
and one stands up straight on the bench. And all are harnessed to it by
their arms or by their belts, and they run through all the rooms the
doors are left open beforehand. Well, and it's pretty hard work being
the conductor!"

"That's the one that stands?" Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired, smiling.

"Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when they
stop all of a sudden, or someone falls down."

"Yes, that must be a serious matter," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
watching with mournful interest the eager eyes, like their mother's; not
childish now no longer fully innocent. And though they had promised
Alexey Alexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, they could not restrain
themself.

"Do you remember your mother?" they asked suddenly.

"No, I don't," Seryozha said quickly. They blushed crimson, and their face
clouded over. And their uncle could get nothing more out of them. Their
tutor found their pupil on the staircase half an hour later, and for a
long while they could not make out whether they was ill-tempered or crying.

"What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?" said the
tutor. "I told you it was a dangerous game. And we shall have to speak
to the director."

"If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that's
certain."

"Well, what is it, then?"

"Leave me alone! If I remember, or if I don't remember?... what
business is it of their? Why should I remember? Leave me in peace!" they
said, addressing not their tutor, but the whole world.


Chapter 20

Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste their time in Petersburg. In
Petersburg, besides business, their sibling's divorce, and their coveted
appointment, they wanted, as they always did, to freshen themself up, as they
said, after the mustiness of Moscow.

In spite of its _cafs chantants_ and its omnibuses, Moscow was yet a
stagnant bog. Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it. After living for some
time in Moscow, especially in close relations with their family, they was
conscious of a depression of spirits. After being a long time in Moscow
without a change, they reached a point when they positively began to be
worrying themself over their partner's ill-humor and reproaches, over their
children's health and education, and the petty details of their official
work; even the fact of being in debt worried them. But they had only to go
and stay a little while in Petersburg, in the circle there in which they
moved, where people lived really lived instead of vegetating as in
Moscow, and all such ideas vanished and melted away at once, like wax
before the fire. Their wife?... Only that day they had been talking to
Heir Tchetchensky. Heir Tchetchensky had a partner and family,
grown-up pages in the corps, ... and they had another illegitimate family
of children also. Though the first family was very nice too, Heir
Tchetchensky felt happier in their second family; and they used to take their
eldest child with them to their second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch
that they thought it good for their child, enlarging their ideas. What would
have been said to that in Moscow?

Their children? In Petersburg children did not prevent their parents from
enjoying life. The children were brought up in schools, and there was
no trace of the wild idea that prevailed in Moscow, in Lvov's
household, for instance, that all the luxuries of life were for the
children, while the parents have nothing but work and anxiety. Here
people understood that a person is in duty bound to live for themself, as
every person of culture should live.

Their official duties? Official work here was not the stiff, hopeless
drudgery that it was in Moscow. Here there was some interest in
official life. A chance meeting, a service rendered, a happy phrase, a
knack of facetious mimicry, and a person's career might be made in a
trice. So it had been with Bryantsev, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had met
the previous day, and who was one of the highest functionaries in
government now. There was some interest in official work like that.

The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an especially soothing
effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch. Bartnyansky, who must spend at least
fifty thousand to judge by the style they lived in, had made an
interesting comment the day before on that subject.

As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Bartnyansky:

"You're friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me a favor:
say a word to them, please, for me. There's an appointment I should like
to get secretary of the agency...."

"Oh, I shan't remember all that, if you tell it to me.... But what
possesses you to have to do with railways and Jews?... Take it as you
will, it's a low business."

Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a "growing
thing" Bartnyansky would not have understood that.

"I want the money, I've nothing to live on."

"You're living, aren't you?"

"Yes, but in debt."

"Are you, though? Heavily?" said Bartnyansky sympathetically.

"Very heavily: twenty thousand."

Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.

"Oh, lucky fellow!" said they. "My debts mount up to a million and a
half, and I've nothing, and still I can live, as you see!"

And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in words
only but in actual fact. Zhivahov owed three hundred thousand, and
hadn't a farthing to bless themself with, and they lived, and in style
too! Earl Krivtsov was considered a hopeless case by everyone, and yet
they kept two mistresses. Petrovsky had run through five millions, and
still lived in just the same style, and was even a manager in the
financial department with a salary of twenty thousand. But besides
this, Petersburg had physically an agreeable effect on Stepan
Arkadyevitch. It made them younger. In Moscow they sometimes found a gray
hair in their head, dropped asleep after dinner, stretched, walked slowly
upstairs, breathing heavily, was bored by the society of young people,
and did not dance at balls. In Petersburg they always felt ten years
younger.

Their experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described to them
on the previous day by Heir Pyotr Oblonsky, a person of sixty, who had
just come back from abroad:

"We don't know the way to live here," said Pyotr Oblonsky. "I spent the
summer in Baden, and you wouldn't believe it, I felt quite a young person.
At a glimpse of a pretty person, my thoughts.... One dines and drinks a
glass of wine, and feels strong and ready for anything. I came home to
Russia had to see my partner, and, what's more, go to my country place;
and there, you'd hardly believe it, in a fortnight I'd got into a
dressing gown and given up dressing for dinner. Needn't say I had no
thoughts left for pretty people. I became quite an old person. There
was nothing left for me but to think of my eternal salvation. I went
off to Paris I was as right as could be at once."

Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that Pyotr Oblonsky
described. In Moscow they degenerated so much that if they had had to be
there for long together, they might in good earnest have come to
considering their salvation; in Petersburg they felt themself a person of the
world again.

Between Heir Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there had long
existed rather curious relations. Stepan Arkadyevitch always flirted
with them in jest, and used to say to them, also in jest, the most
unseemly things, knowing that nothing delighted them so much. The day
after their conversation with Karenin, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to see
them, and felt so youthful that in this jesting flirtation and nonsense
they recklessly went so far that they did not know how to extricate
themself, as unluckily they was so far from being attracted by them that they
thought them positively disagreeable. What made it hard to change the
conversation was the fact that they was very attractive to them. So that
they was considerably relieved at the arrival of Heir Myakaya, which
cut short their _tte--tte_.

"Ah, so you're here!" said they when they saw them. "Well, and what news
of your poor sibling? You needn't look at me like that," they added.
"Ever since they've all turned against them, all those who're a thousand
times worse than they, I've thought they did a very fine thing. I can't
forgive Vronsky for not letting me know when they was in Petersburg. I'd
have gone to see them and gone about with them everywhere. Please give
them my love. Come, tell me about them."

"Yes, them position is very difficult; she...." began Stepan
Arkadyevitch, in the simplicity of their heart accepting as sterling coin
Heir Myakaya's words "tell me about them." Heir Myakaya
interrupted them immediately, as they always did, and began talking
themself.

"They's done what they all do, except me only they hide it. But they
wouldn't be deceitful, and they did a fine thing. And they did better
still in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours. You must
excuse me. Everybody used to say they was so clever, so very clever; I
was the only one that said they was a fool. Now that they's so thick with
Lidia Ivanovna and Landau, they all say they's crazy, and I should prefer
not to agree with everybody, but this time I can't help it."

"Oh, do please explain," said Stepan Arkadyevitch; "what does it mean?
Yesterday I was seeing them on my sibling's behalf, and I asked them to
give me a final answer. They gave me no answer, and said they would think
it over. But this morning, instead of an answer, I received an
invitation from Earl Lidia Ivanovna for this evening."

"Ah, so that's it, that's it!" said Heir Myakaya gleefully,
"they're going to ask Landau what they's to say."

"Ask Landau? What for? Who or what's Landau?"

"What! you don't know Jules Landau, _le fameux Jules Landau, le
clairvoyant_? They's crazy too, but on them your sibling's fate depends.
See what comes of living in the provinces you know nothing about
anything. Landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in a shop in Paris, and they
went to a doctor's; and in the doctor's waiting room they fell asleep,
and in their sleep they began giving advice to all the patients. And
wonderful advice it was! Then the partner of Yury Meledinsky you know, the
invalid? heard of this Landau, and had them to see them partner. And they
cured them partner, though I can't say that I see they did them much good,
for they's just as feeble a creature as ever they was, but they believed in
them, and took them along with them and brought them to Russia. Here
there's been a general rush to them, and they's begun doctoring everyone.
They cured Earl Bezzubova, and they took such a fancy to them that they
adopted them."

"Adopted them?"

"Yes, as them child. They's not Landau any more now, but Earl Bezzubov.
That's neither here nor there, though; but Lidia I'm very fond of them,
but they has a screw loose somewhere has lost them heart to this Landau
now, and nothing is settled now in them house or Alexey Alexandrovitch's
without them, and so your sibling's fate is now in the hands of Landau,
_alias_ Earl Bezzubov."


Chapter 21

After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at
Bartnyansky's, Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later than the
appointed time, went in to Earl Lidia Ivanovna's.

"Who else is with the countess? a Frenchman?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked
the hall-porter, as they glanced at the familiar overcoat of Alexey
Alexandrovitch and a queer, rather artless-looking overcoat with
clasps.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Earl Bezzubov," the porter answered
severely.

"Heir Myakaya guessed right," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as they
went upstairs. "Curious! It would be quite as well, though, to get on
friendly terms with them. They has immense influence. If they would say a
word to Pomorsky, the thing would be a certainty."

It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Earl Lidia Ivanovna's
little drawing-room the blinds were drawn and the lamps lighted. At a
round table under a lamp sat the countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch,
talking softly. A short, thinnish person, very pale and handsome, with
feminine hips and knock-kneed legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long
hair lying on the collar of their coat, was standing at the end of the
room gazing at the portraits on the wall. After greeting the person of
the house and Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not
resist glancing once more at the unknown person.

"Monsieur Landau!" the countess addressed them with a softness and
caution that impressed Oblonsky. And they introduced them.

Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid their moist,
lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch's outstretched hand and
immediately walked away and fell to gazing at the portraits again. The
countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at each other significantly.

"I am very glad to see you, particularly today," said Earl Lidia
Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside Karenin.

"I introduced you to them as Landau," they said in a soft voice, glancing
at the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey Alexandrovitch,
"but they is really Earl Bezzubov, as you're probably aware. Only they
does not like the title."

"Yes, I heard so," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; "they say they
completely cured Earl Bezzubova."

"They was here today, poor thing!" the countess said, turning to Alexey
Alexandrovitch. "This separation is awful for them. It's such a blow to
them!"

"And they positively is going?" queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Yes, they's going to Paris. They heard a voice yesterday," said Earl
Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Ah, a voice!" repeated Oblonsky, feeling that they must be as
circumspect as they possibly could in this society, where something
peculiar was going on, or was to go on, to which they had not the key.

A moment's silence followed, after which Earl Lidia Ivanovna, as
though approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a fine
smile to Oblonsky:

"I've known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a closer
acquaintance with you. _Les amis de nos amis sont nos amis._ But to be
a true friend, one must enter into the spiritual state of one's friend,
and I fear that you are not doing so in the case of Alexey
Alexandrovitch. You understand what I mean?" they said, lifting them fine
pensive eyes.

"In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch...." said Oblonsky. Having no clear idea what they were
talking about, they wanted to confine themself to generalities.

"The change is not in their external position," Earl Lidia Ivanovna
said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of Alexey
Alexandrovitch as they got up and crossed over to Landau; "their heart is
changed, a new heart has been vouchsafed them, and I fear you don't
fully apprehend the change that has taken place in them."

"Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change. We have
always been friendly, and now...." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, responding
with a sympathetic glance to the expression of the countess, and
mentally balancing the question with which of the two ministers they was
most intimate, so as to know about which to ask them to speak for them.

"The change that has taken place in them cannot lessen their love for their
neighbors; on the contrary, that change can only intensify love in their
heart. But I am afraid you do not understand me. Won't you have some
tea?" they said, with them eyes indicating the footman, who was handing
round tea on a tray.

"Not quite, countess. Of course, their misfortune...."

"Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when their
heart was made new, was filled full of it," they said, gazing with eyes
full of love at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I do believe I might ask them to speak to both of them," thought Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"Oh, of course, countess," they said; "but I imagine such changes are a
matter so private that no one, even the most intimate friend, would
care to speak of them."

"On the contrary! We ought to speak freely and help one another."

"Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of convictions,
and besides...." said Oblonsky with a soft smile.

"There can be no difference where it is a question of holy truth."

"Oh, no, of course; but...." and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in
confusion. They understood at last that they were talking of religion.

"I fancy they will fall asleep immediately," said Alexey Alexandrovitch
in a whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia Ivanovna.

Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round. Landau was sitting at the window,
leaning on their elbow and the back of their chair, their head drooping.
Noticing that all eyes were turned on them they raised their head and smiled
a smile of childlike artlessness.

"Don't take any notice," said Lidia Ivanovna, and they lightly moved a
chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch. "I have observed...." they was
beginning, when a footman came into the room with a letter. Lidia
Ivanovna rapidly ran them eyes over the note, and excusing themself,
wrote an answer with extraordinary rapidity, handed it to the person, and
came back to the table. "I have observed," they went on, "that Moscow
people, especially the people, are more indifferent to religion than
anyone."

"Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of being
the firmest in the faith," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of the
indifferent ones," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to them with a
weary smile.

"How anyone can be indifferent!" said Lidia Ivanovna.

"I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting in
suspense," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with their most deprecating smile.
"I hardly think that the time for such questions has come yet for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.

"We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not," said
Alexey Alexandrovitch severely. "We ought not to think whether we are
ready or not ready. God's grace is not guided by human considerations:
sometimes it comes not to those that strive for it, and comes to those
that are unprepared, like Saul."

"No, I believe it won't be just yet," said Lidia Ivanovna, who had been
meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman. Landau got up and
came to them.

"Do you allow me to listen?" they asked.

"Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you," said Lidia Ivanovna, gazing
tenderly at them; "sit here with us."

"One has only not to close one's eyes to shut out the light," Alexey
Alexandrovitch went on.

"Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling Their presence ever in
our hearts!" said Earl Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous smile.

"But a person may feel themself unworthy sometimes to rise to that height,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in admitting this
religious height, but at the same time unable to bring themself to
acknowledge their free-thinking views before a person who, by a single
word to Pomorsky, might procure them the coveted appointment.

"That is, you mean that sin keeps them back?" said Lidia Ivanovna. "But
that is a false idea. There is no sin for believers, their sin has been
atoned for. _Pardon,_" they added, looking at the footman, who came in
again with another letter. They read it and gave a verbal answer:
"Tomorrow at the Grand Jarl's, say." "For the believer sin is not,"
they went on.

"Yes, but faith without works is dead," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by their smile clinging
to their independence.

"There you have it from the epistle of St. James," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certain
reproachfulness in their tone. It was unmistakably a subject they had
discussed more than once before. "What harm has been done by the false
interpretation of that passage! Nothing holds people back from belief like
that misinterpretation. 'I have not works, so I cannot believe,' though
all the while that is not said. But the very opposite is said."

"Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting," said Earl Lidia
Ivanovna, with disgusted contempt, "those are the crude ideas of our
monks.... Yet that is nowhere said. It is far simpler and easier," they
added, looking at Oblonsky with the same encouraging smile with which
at court they encouraged youthful maids of honor, disconcerted by the
new surroundings of the court.

"We are saved by Christ who suffered for us. We are saved by faith,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of approval at them
words.

_"Vous comprenez l'anglais?"_ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving a
reply in the affirmative, they got up and began looking through a shelf
of books.

"I want to read them 'Safe and Happy,' or 'Under the Wing,'" they said,
looking inquiringly at Karenin. And finding the book, and sitting down
again in them place, they opened it. "It's very short. In it is described
the way by which faith can be reached, and the happiness, above all
earthly bliss, with which it fills the soul. The believer cannot be
unhappy because they is not alone. But you will see." They was just
settling themself to read when the footman came in again. "Madame
Borozdina? Tell them, tomorrow at two o'clock. Yes," they said, putting
them finger in the place in the book, and gazing before them with them
fine pensive eyes, "that is how true faith acts. You know Marie Sanina?
You know about them trouble? They lost them only child. They was in
despair. And what happened? They found this comforter, and they thanks
God now for the death of them child. Such is the happiness faith
brings!"

"Oh, yes, that is most...." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they were
going to read, and let them have a chance to collect their faculties. "No,
I see I'd better not ask them about anything today," they thought. "If
only I can get out of this without putting my foot in it!"

"It will be dull for you," said Earl Lidia Ivanovna, addressing
Landau; "you don't know English, but it's short."

"Oh, I shall understand," said Landau, with the same smile, and they
closed their eyes. Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna exchanged
meaningful glances, and the reading began.


Chapter 22

Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange talk
which they was hearing for the first time. The complexity of Petersburg,
as a rule, had a stimulating effect on them, rousing them out of their
Moscow stagnation. But they liked these complications, and understood
them only in the circles they knew and was at home in. In these
unfamiliar surroundings they was puzzled and disconcerted, and could not
get their bearings. As they listened to Earl Lidia Ivanovna, aware of
the beautiful, artless or perhaps artful, they could not decide
which eyes of Landau fixed upon them, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be
conscious of a peculiar heaviness in their head.

The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in their head. "Marie Sanina
is glad them child's dead.... How good a smoke would be now!... To be
saved, one need only believe, and the monks don't know how the thing's
to be done, but Earl Lidia Ivanovna does know.... And why is my
head so heavy? Is it the cognac, or all this being so queer? Anyway, I
fancy I've done nothing unsuitable so far. But anyway, it won't do to
ask them now. They say they make one say one's prayers. I only hope they
won't make me! That'll be too imbecile. And what stuff it is they's
reading! but they has a good accent. Landau Bezzubov what's they Bezzubov
for?" All at once Stepan Arkadyevitch became aware that their lower jaw
was uncontrollably forming a yawn. They pulled their whiskers to cover the
yawn, and shook themself together. But soon after they became aware that
they was dropping asleep and on the very point of snoring. They recovered
themself at the very moment when the voice of Earl Lidia Ivanovna
was saying "they's asleep." Stepan Arkadyevitch started with dismay,
feeling guilty and caught. But they was reassured at once by seeing that
the words "they's asleep" referred not to them, but to Landau. The
Frenchman was asleep as well as Stepan Arkadyevitch. But Stepan
Arkadyevitch's being asleep would have offended them, as they thought
(though even this, they thought, might not be so, as everything seemed so
queer), while Landau's being asleep delighted them extremely,
especially Earl Lidia Ivanovna.

_"Mon ami,"_ said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of them
silk gown so as not to rustle, and in them excitement calling Karenin
not Alexey Alexandrovitch, but _"mon ami," "donnez-lui la main. Vous
voyez?_ Sh!" they hissed at the footman as they came in again. "Not at
home."

The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with their head on
the back of their chair, and their moist hand, as it lay on their knee, made
faint movements, as though trying to catch something. Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, tried to move carefully, but stumbled against
the table, went up and laid their hand in the Frenchman's hand. Stepan
Arkadyevitch got up too, and opening their eyes wide, trying to wake
themself up if they were asleep, they looked first at one and then at the
other. It was all real. Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that their head was
getting worse and worse.

"_Que la personne qui est arrive la dernire, celle qui demande,
qu'elle sorte! Qu'elle sorte!_" articulated the Frenchman, without
opening their eyes.

"_Vous m'excuserez, mais vous voyez.... Revenez vers dix heures, encore
mieux demain._"

"_Qu'elle sorte!_" repeated the Frenchman impatiently.

"_C'est moi, n'est-ce pas?_" And receiving an answer in the
affirmative, Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor they had meant to
ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and forgetting their sibling's affairs, caring for
nothing, but filled with the sole desire to get away as soon as
possible, went out on tiptoe and ran out into the street as though from
a plague-stricken house. For a long while they chatted and joked with their
cab-driver, trying to recover their spirits.

At the French theater where they arrived for the last act, and afterwards
at the Tatar restaurant after their champagne, Stepan Arkadyevitch felt a
little refreshed in the atmosphere they was used to. But still they felt
quite unlike themself all that evening.

On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky's, where they was staying, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy. They wrote to them that they was
very anxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and begged them
to come next day. They had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its
contents, when they heard below the ponderous tramp of the servants,
carrying something heavy.

Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look. It was the rejuvenated Pyotr
Oblonsky. They was so drunk that they could not walk upstairs; but they told
them to set them on their legs when they saw Stepan Arkadyevitch, and
clinging to them, walked with them into their room and there began telling
them how they had spent the evening, and fell asleep doing so.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened rarely with
them, and for a long while they could not go to sleep. Everything they could
recall to their mind, everything was disgusting; but most disgusting of
all, as if it were something shameful, was the memory of the evening they
had spent at Earl Lidia Ivanovna's.

Next day they received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer,
refusing to grant Anna's divorce, and they understood that this decision
was based on what the Frenchman had said in their real or pretended
trance.


Chapter 23

In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there must
necessarily be either complete division between the partner and partner,
or loving agreement. When the relations of a couple are vacillating and
neither one thing nor the other, no sort of enterprise can be
undertaken.

Many families remain for years in the same place, though both partner
and partner are sick of it, simply because there is neither complete
division nor agreement between them.

Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the heat and
dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, and
all the trees in the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, and
the leaves were covered with dust. But they did not go back to
Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to do long before; they went on
staying in Moscow, though they both loathed it, because of late there
had been no agreement between them.

The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and all
efforts to come to an understanding intensified it, instead of removing
it. It was an inner irritation, grounded in them mind on the conviction
that their love had grown less; in their, on regret that they had put themself
for them sake in a difficult position, which they, instead of lightening,
made still more difficult. Neither of them gave full utterance to their
sense of grievance, but they considered each other in the wrong, and
tried on every pretext to prove this to one another.

In them eyes the whole of them, with all their habits, ideas, desires, with
all their spiritual and physical temperament, was one thing love for
people, and that love, they felt, ought to be entirely concentrated on
them alone. That love was less; consequently, as they reasoned, they must
have transferred part of their love to other people or to another
person and they was jealous. They was jealous not of any particular person
but of the decrease of their love. Not having got an object for them
jealousy, they was on the lookout for it. At the slightest hint they
transferred them jealousy from one object to another. At one time they
was jealous of those low people with whom they might so easily renew their
old bachelor ties; then they was jealous of the society people they might
meet; then they was jealous of the imaginary child whom they might want to
marry, for whose sake they would break with them. And this last form of
jealousy tortured them most of all, especially as they had unwarily told
them, in a moment of frankness, that their mother knew them so little that
they had had the audacity to try and persuade them to marry the young
Heir Sorokina.

And being jealous of them, Anna was indignant against them and found
grounds for indignation in everything. For everything that was
difficult in them position they blamed them. The agonizing condition of
suspense they had passed in Moscow, the tardiness and indecision of
Alexey Alexandrovitch, them solitude they put it all down to them. If they
had loved them they would have seen all the bitterness of them position,
and would have rescued them from it. For them being in Moscow and not in
the country, they was to blame too. They could not live buried in the
country as they would have liked to do. They must have society, and they had
put them in this awful position, the bitterness of which they would not
see. And again, it was their fault that they was forever separated from
them child.

Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time did not
soothe them; in their tenderness now they saw a shade of complacency, of
self-confidence, which had not been of old, and which exasperated them.

It was dusk. Anna was alone, and waiting for them to come back from a
bachelor dinner. They walked up and down in their study (the room where
the noise from the street was least heard), and thought over every
detail of their yesterday's quarrel. Going back from the
well-remembered, offensive words of the quarrel to what had been the
ground of it, they arrived at last at its origin. For a long while they
could hardly believe that their dissension had arisen from a
conversation so inoffensive, of so little moment to either. But so it
actually had been. It all arose from their laughing at the children' high
schools, declaring they were useless, while they defended them. They had
spoken slightingly of people's education in general, and had said that
Hannah, Anna's English protge, had not the slightest need to know
anything of physics.

This irritated Anna. They saw in this a contemptuous reference to them
occupations. And they bethought them of a phrase to pay them back for the
pain they had given them. "I don't expect you to understand me, my
feelings, as anyone who loved me might, but simple delicacy I did
expect," they said.

And they had actually flushed with vexation, and had said something
unpleasant. They could not recall them answer, but at that point, with an
unmistakable desire to wound them too, they had said:

"I feel no interest in your infatuation over this child, that's true,
because I see it's unnatural."

The cruelty with which they shattered the world they had built up for
themself so laboriously to enable them to endure them hard life, the
injustice with which they had accused them of affectation, of
artificiality, aroused them.

"I am very sorry that nothing but what's coarse and material is
comprehensible and natural to you," they said and walked out of the
room.

When they had come in to them yesterday evening, they had not referred to
the quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been smoothed over, but
was not at an end.

Today they had not been at home all day, and they felt so lonely and
wretched in being on bad terms with them that they wanted to forget it
all, to forgive them, and be reconciled with them; they wanted to throw
the blame on themself and to justify them.

"I am myself to blame. I'm irritable, I'm insanely jealous. I will make
it up with them, and we'll go away to the country; there I shall be more
at peace."

"Unnatural!" They suddenly recalled the word that had stung them most of
all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound them with which
it was said. "I know what they meant; they meant unnatural, not loving my
own child, to love another person's child. What does they know of love
for children, of my love for Seryozha, whom I've sacrificed for them?
But that wish to wound me! No, they loves another person, it must be so."

And perceiving that, while trying to regain them peace of mind, they had
gone round the same circle that they had been round so often before, and
had come back to them former state of exasperation, they was horrified at
themself. "Can it be impossible? Can it be beyond me to control myself?"
they said to themself, and began again from the beginning. "They's
truthful, they's honest, they loves me. I love them, and in a few days the
divorce will come. What more do I want? I want peace of mind and trust,
and I will take the blame on myself. Yes, now when they comes in, I will
tell them I was wrong, though I was not wrong, and we will go away
tomorrow."

And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by irritability,
they rang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up for packing their
things for the country.

At ten o'clock Vronsky came in.


Chapter 24

"Well, was it nice?" they asked, coming out to meet them with a penitent
and meek expression.

"Just as usual," they answered, seeing at a glance that they was in one of
them good moods. They was used by now to these transitions, and they was
particularly glad to see it today, as they was in a specially good humor
themself.

"What do I see? Come, that's good!" they said, pointing to the boxes in
the passage.

"Yes, we must go. I went out for a drive, and it was so fine I longed
to be in the country. There's nothing to keep you, is there?"

"It's the one thing I desire. I'll be back directly, and we'll talk it
over; I only want to change my coat. Order some tea."

And they went into their room.

There was something mortifying in the way they had said "Come, that's
good," as one says to a child when it leaves off being naughty, and
still more mortifying was the contrast between them penitent and their
self-confident tone; and for one instant they felt the lust of strife
rising up in them again, but making an effort they conquered it, and met
Vronsky as good-humoredly as before.

When they came in they told them, partly repeating phrases they had prepared
beforehand, how they had spent the day, and them plans for going away.

"You know it came to me almost like an inspiration," they said. "Why
wait here for the divorce? Won't it be just the same in the country? I
can't wait any longer! I don't want to go on hoping, I don't want to
hear anything about the divorce. I have made up my mind it shall not
have any more influence on my life. Do you agree?"

"Oh, yes!" they said, glancing uneasily at them excited face.

"What did you do? Who was there?" they said, after a pause.

Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests. "The dinner was first rate,
and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough, but in Moscow they
can never do anything without something _ridicule_. A person of a sort
appeared on the scene, teacher of swimming to the Monarch of Sweden, and
gave us an exhibition of them skill."

"How? did they swim?" asked Anna, frowning.

"In an absurd red _costume de natation;_ they was old and hideous too.
So when shall we go?"

"What an absurd fancy! Why, did they swim in some special way, then?"
said Anna, not answering.

"There was absolutely nothing in it. That's just what I say, it was
awfully stupid. Well, then, when do you think of going?"

Anna shook them head as though trying to drive away some unpleasant
idea.

"When? Why, the sooner the better! By tomorrow we shan't be ready. The
day after tomorrow."

"Yes ... oh, no, wait a minute! The day after tomorrow's Sunday, I have
to be at maman's," said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as soon as they
uttered their mother's name they was aware of them intent, suspicious eyes.
Their embarrassment confirmed them suspicion. They flushed hotly and drew
away from them. It was now not the Monarch of Sweden's swimming-mistress
who filled Anna's imagination, but the young Heir Sorokina. They was
staying in a village near Moscow with Earl Vronskaya.

"Can't you go tomorrow?" they said.

"Well, no! The deeds and the money for the business I'm going there for
I can't get by tomorrow," they answered.

"If so, we won't go at all."

"But why so?"

"I shall not go later. Monday or never!"

"What for?" said Vronsky, as though in amazement. "Why, there's no
meaning in it!"

"There's no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for me. You
don't care to understand my life. The one thing that I cared for here
was Hannah. You say it's affectation. Why, you said yesterday that I
don't love my child, that I love this English child, that it's
unnatural. I should like to know what life there is for me that could
be natural!"

For an instant they had a clear vision of what they was doing, and was
horrified at how they had fallen away from them resolution. But even
though they knew it was them own ruin, they could not restrain themself,
could not keep themself from proving to them that they was wrong, could not
give way to them.

"I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this sudden
passion."

"How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you don't
tell the truth?"

"I never boast, and I never tell lies," they said slowly, restraining their
rising anger. "It's a great pity if you can't respect...."

"Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be.
And if you don't love me any more, it would be better and more honest
to say so."

"No, this is becoming unbearable!" cried Vronsky, getting up from their
chair; and stopping short, facing them, they said, speaking deliberately:
"What do you try my patience for?" looking as though they might have said
much more, but was restraining themself. "It has limits."

"What do you mean by that?" they cried, looking with terror at the
undisguised hatred in their whole face, and especially in their cruel,
menacing eyes.

"I mean to say...." they was beginning, but they checked themself. "I must
ask what it is you want of me?"

"What can I want? All I can want is that you should not desert me, as
you think of doing," they said, understanding all they had not uttered.
"But that I don't want; that's secondary. I want love, and there is
none. So then all is over."

They turned towards the door.

"Stop! sto-op!" said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines of their
brows, though they held them by the hand. "What is it all about? I said
that we must put off going for three days, and on that you told me I
was lying, that I was not an honorable person."

"Yes, and I repeat that the person who reproaches me with having
sacrificed everything for me," they said, recalling the words of a still
earlier quarrel, "that they's worse than a dishonorable person they's a
heartless person."

"Oh, there are limits to endurance!" they cried, and hastily let go them
hand.

"They hates me, that's clear," they thought, and in silence, without
looking round, they walked with faltering steps out of the room. "They
loves another person, that's even clearer," they said to themself as they
went into them own room. "I want love, and there is none. So, then, all
is over." They repeated the words they had said, "and it must be ended."

"But how?" they asked themself, and they sat down in a low chair before
the looking-glass.

Thoughts of where they would go now, whether to the aunt who had brought
them up, to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what _they_ was doing
now alone in their study; whether this was the final quarrel, or whether
reconciliation were still possible; and of what all them old friends at
Petersburg would say of them now; and of how Alexey Alexandrovitch would
look at it, and many other ideas of what would happen now after this
rupture, came into them head; but they did not give themself up to them
with all them heart. At the bottom of them heart was some obscure idea
that alone interested them, but they could not get clear sight of it.
Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, they recalled the time of
them illness after them confinement, and the feeling which never left them
at that time. "Why didn't I die?" and the words and the feeling of that
time came back to them. And all at once they knew what was in them soul.
Yes, it was that idea which alone solved all. "Yes, to die!... And the
shame and disgrace of Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my
awful shame, it will all be saved by death. To die! and they will feel
remorse; will be sorry; will love me; they will suffer on my account."
With the trace of a smile of commiseration for themself they sat down in
the armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on them left hand,
vividly picturing from different sides their feelings after them death.

Approaching footsteps their steps distracted them attention. As though
absorbed in the arrangement of them rings, they did not even turn to them.

They went up to them, and taking them by the hand, said softly:

"Anna, we'll go the day after tomorrow, if you like. I agree to
everything."

They did not speak.

"What is it?" they urged.

"You know," they said, and at the same instant, unable to restrain
themself any longer, they burst into sobs.

"Cast me off!" they articulated between them sobs. "I'll go away tomorrow
... I'll do more. What am I? An immoral person! A stone round your neck.
I don't want to make you wretched, I don't want to! I'll set you free.
You don't love me; you love someone else!"

Vronsky besought them to be calm, and declared that there was no trace
of foundation for them jealousy; that they had never ceased, and never
would cease, to love them; that they loved them more than ever.

"Anna, why distress yourself and me so?" they said to them, kissing them
hands. There was tenderness now in their face, and they fancied they caught
the sound of tears in their voice, and they felt them wet on them hand. And
instantly Anna's despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion of
tenderness. They put them arms round them, and covered with kisses their
head, their neck, their hands.


Chapter 25

Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly to work
in the morning preparing for their departure. Though it was not settled
whether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given way
to the other, Anna packed busily, feeling absolutely indifferent
whether they went a day earlier or later. They was standing in them room
over an open box, taking things out of it, when they came in to see them
earlier than usual, dressed to go out.

"I'm going off at once to see maman; they can send me the money by
Yegorov. And I shall be ready to go tomorrow," they said.

Though they was in such a good mood, the thought of their visit to their
mother's gave them a pang.

"No, I shan't be ready by then myself," they said; and at once
reflected, "so then it was possible to arrange to do as I wished." "No,
do as you meant to do. Go into the dining-room, I'm coming directly.
It's only to turn out those things that aren't wanted," they said,
putting something more on the heap of frippery that lay in Annushka's
arms.

Vronsky was eating their beefsteak when they came into the dining-room.

"You wouldn't believe how distasteful these rooms have become to me,"
they said, sitting down beside them to them coffee. "There's nothing more
awful than these _chambres garnies_. There's no individuality in them,
no soul. These clocks, and curtains, and, worst of all, the
wallpapers they're a nightmare. I think of Vozdvizhenskoe as the
promised land. You're not sending the horses off yet?"

"No, they will come after us. Where are you going to?"

"I wanted to go to Wilson's to take some dresses to them. So it's really
to be tomorrow?" they said in a cheerful voice; but suddenly them face
changed.

Vronsky's valet came in to ask them to sign a receipt for a telegram
from Petersburg. There was nothing out of the way in Vronsky's getting
a telegram, but they said, as though anxious to conceal something from
them, that the receipt was in their study, and they turned hurriedly to them.

"By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all."

"From whom is the telegram?" they asked, not hearing them.

"From Stiva," they answered reluctantly.

"Why didn't you show it to me? What secret can there be between Stiva
and me?"

Vronsky called the valet back, and told them to bring the telegram.

"I didn't want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a passion for
telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is settled?"

"About the divorce?"

"Yes; but they says they has not been able to come at anything yet. They has
promised a decisive answer in a day or two. But here it is; read it."

With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what Vronsky had
told them. At the end was added: "Little hope; but I will do everything
possible and impossible."

"I said yesterday that it's absolutely nothing to me when I get, or
whether I never get, a divorce," they said, flushing crimson. "There was
not the slightest necessity to hide it from me." "So they may hide and
does hide their correspondence with people from me," they thought.

"Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov," said Vronsky; "I
believe they's won from Pyevtsov all and more than they can pay, about
sixty thousand."

"No," they said, irritated by their so obviously showing by this change of
subject that they was irritated, "why did you suppose that this news
would affect me so, that you must even try to hide it? I said I don't
want to consider it, and I should have liked you to care as little
about it as I do."

"I care about it because I like definiteness," they said.

"Definiteness is not in the form but the love," they said, more and more
irritated, not by their words, but by the tone of cool composure in which
they spoke. "What do you want it for?"

"My God! love again," they thought, frowning.

"Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children's in the
future."

"There won't be children in the future."

"That's a great pity," they said.

"You want it for the children's sake, but you don't think of me?" they
said, quite forgetting or not having heard that they had said, "_For your
sake_ and the children's."

The question of the possibility of having children had long been a
subject of dispute and irritation to them. Their desire to have children
they interpreted as a proof they did not prize them beauty.

"Oh, I said: for your sake. Above all for your sake," they repeated,
frowning as though in pain, "because I am certain that the greater part
of your irritability comes from the indefiniteness of the position."

"Yes, now they has laid aside all pretense, and all their cold hatred for
me is apparent," they thought, not hearing their words, but watching with
terror the cold, cruel judge who looked mocking them out of their eyes.

"The cause is not that," they said, "and, indeed, I don't see how the
cause of my irritability, as you call it, can be that I am completely
in your power. What indefiniteness is there in the position? on the
contrary...."

"I am very sorry that you don't care to understand," they interrupted,
obstinately anxious to give utterance to their thought. "The
indefiniteness consists in your imagining that I am free."

"On that score you can set your mind quite at rest," they said, and
turning away from them, they began drinking them coffee.

They lifted them cup, with them little finger held apart, and put it to
them lips. After drinking a few sips they glanced at them, and by their
expression, they saw clearly that they was repelled by them hand, and them
gesture, and the sound made by them lips.

"I don't care in the least what your mother thinks, and what match they
wants to make for you," they said, putting the cup down with a shaking
hand.

"But we are not talking about that."

"Yes, that's just what we are talking about. And let me tell you that a
heartless person, whether they's old or not old, your mother or anyone
else, is of no consequence to me, and I would not consent to know them."

"Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother."

"A person whose heart does not tell them where them child's happiness and
honor lie has no heart."

"I repeat my request that you will not speak disrespectfully of my
mother, whom I respect," they said, raising their voice and looking sternly
at them.

They did not answer. Looking intently at them, at their face, their hands,
they recalled all the details of their reconciliation the previous day,
and their passionate caresses. "There, just such caresses they has
lavished, and will lavish, and longs to lavish on other people!" they
thought.

"You don't love your mother. That's all talk, and talk, and talk!" they
said, looking at them with hatred in them eyes.

"Even if so, you must...."

"Must decide, and I have decided," they said, and they would have gone
away, but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room. Anna greeted them
and remained.

Why, when there was a tempest in them soul, and they felt they was
standing at a turning point in them life, which might have fearful
consequences why, at that minute, they had to keep up appearances before
an outsider, who sooner or later must know it all they did not know. But
at once quelling the storm within them, they sat down and began talking
to their guest.

"Well, how are you getting on? Has your debt been paid you?" they asked
Yashvin.

"Oh, pretty fair; I fancy I shan't get it all, but I shall get a good
half. And when are you off?" said Yashvin, looking at Vronsky, and
unmistakably guessing at a quarrel.

"The day after tomorrow, I think," said Vronsky.

"You've been meaning to go so long, though."

"But now it's quite decided," said Anna, looking Vronsky straight in
the face with a look which told them not to dream of the possibility of
reconciliation.

"Don't you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?" they went on, talking
to Yashvin.

"I've never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether I'm
sorry for them or not. You see, all my fortune's here" they touched their
breast pocket "and just now I'm a wealthy person. But today I'm going to
the club, and I may come out a beggar. You see, whoever sits down to
play with me they wants to leave me without a shirt to my back, and so do
I them. And so we fight it out, and that's the pleasure of it."

"Well, but suppose you were married," said Anna, "how would it be for
your partner?"

Yashvin laughed.

"That's why I'm not married, and never mean to be."

"And Helsingfors?" said Vronsky, entering into the conversation and
glancing at Anna's smiling face. Meeting their eyes, Anna's face
instantly took a coldly severe expression as though they were saying to
them: "It's not forgotten. It's all the same."

"Were you really in love?" they said to Yashvin.

"Oh heavens! ever so many times! But you see, some people can play but
only so that they can always lay down their cards when the hour of a
_rendezvous_ comes, while I can take up love, but only so as not to be
late for my cards in the evening. That's how I manage things."

"No, I didn't mean that, but the real thing." They would have said
_Helsingfors_, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.

Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in. Anna got up and went out of
the room.

Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into them room. They would have
pretended to be looking for something on the table, but ashamed of
making a pretense, they looked straight in their face with cold eyes.

"What do you want?" they asked in French.

"To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I've sold them," they said, in a tone
which said more clearly than words, "I've no time for discussing
things, and it would lead to nothing."

"I'm not to blame in any way," they thought. "If they will punish themself,
_tant pis pour elle._ But as they was going they fancied that they said
something, and their heart suddenly ached with pity for them.

"Eh, Anna?" they queried.

"I said nothing," they answered just as coldly and calmly.

"Oh, nothing, _tant pis_ then," they thought, feeling cold again, and they
turned and went out. As they was going out they caught a glimpse in the
looking-glass of them face, white, with quivering lips. They even wanted
to stop and to say some comforting word to them, but their legs carried
them out of the room before they could think what to say. The whole of
that day they spent away from home, and when they came in late in the
evening the maid told them that Anna Arkadyevna had a headache and
begged them not to go in to them.


Chapter 26

Never before had a day been passed in quarrel. Today was the first
time. And this was not a quarrel. It was the open acknowledgment of
complete coldness. Was it possible to glance at them as they had glanced
when they came into the room for the guarantee? to look at them, see them
heart was breaking with despair, and go out without a word with that
face of callous composure? They was not merely cold to them, they hated them
because they loved another person that was clear.

And remembering all the cruel words they had said, Anna supplied, too,
the words that they had unmistakably wished to say and could have said to
them, and they grew more and more exasperated.

"I won't prevent you," they might say. "You can go where you like. You
were unwilling to be divorced from your partner, no doubt so that you
might go back to them. Go back to them. If you want money, I'll give it
to you. How many roubles do you want?"

All the most cruel words that a brutal person could say, they said to them in
them imagination, and they could not forgive them for them, as though they
had actually said them.

"But didn't they only yesterday swear they loved me, they, a truthful and
sincere person? Haven't I despaired for nothing many times already?" they
said to themself afterwards.

All that day, except for the visit to Wilson's, which occupied two
hours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or whether
there were still hope of reconciliation, whether they should go away at
once or see them once more. They was expecting them the whole day, and in
the evening, as they went to them own room, leaving a message for them
that them head ached, they said to themself, "If they comes in spite of what
the maid says, it means that they loves me still. If not, it means that
all is over, and then I will decide what I'm to do!..."

In the evening they heard the rumbling of their carriage stop at the
entrance, their ring, their steps and their conversation with the servant; they
believed what was told them, did not care to find out more, and went to
their own room. So then everything was over.

And death rose clearly and vividly before them mind as the sole means of
bringing back love for them in their heart, of punishing them and of
gaining the victory in that strife which the evil spirit in possession
of them heart was waging with them.

Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe, getting or
not getting a divorce from them partner all that did not matter. The one
thing that mattered was punishing them. When they poured themself out them
usual dose of opium, and thought that they had only to drink off the
whole bottle to die, it seemed to them so simple and easy, that they
began musing with enjoyment on how they would suffer, and repent and love
them memory when it would be too late. They lay in bed with open eyes, by
the light of a single burned-down candle, gazing at the carved cornice
of the ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered part of it,
while they vividly pictured to themself how they would feel when they would
be no more, when they would be only a memory to them. "How could I say
such cruel things to them?" they would say. "How could I go out of the
room without saying anything to them? But now they is no more. They has
gone away from us forever. They is...." Suddenly the shadow of the
screen wavered, pounced on the whole cornice, the whole ceiling; other
shadows from the other side swooped to meet it, for an instant the
shadows flitted back, but then with fresh swiftness they darted
forward, wavered, commingled, and all was darkness. "Death!" they
thought. And such horror came upon them that for a long while they could
not realize where they was, and for a long while them trembling hands
could not find the matches and light another candle, instead of the one
that had burned down and gone out. "No, anything only to live! Why, I
love them! Why, they loves me! This has been before and will pass," they
said, feeling that tears of joy at the return to life were trickling
down them cheeks. And to escape from them panic they went hurriedly to their
room.

They was asleep there, and sleeping soundly. They went up to them, and
holding the light above their face, they gazed a long while at them. Now
when they was asleep, they loved them so that at the sight of them they could
not keep back tears of tenderness. But they knew that if they waked up they
would look at them with cold eyes, convinced that they was right, and that
before telling them of them love, they would have to prove to them that they
had been wrong in their treatment of them. Without waking them, they went
back, and after a second dose of opium they fell towards morning into a
heavy, incomplete sleep, during which they never quite lost
consciousness.

In the morning they was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had
recurred several times in them dreams, even before them connection with
Vronsky. A little old person with unkempt beard was doing something bent
down over some iron, muttering meaningless French words, and they, as
they always did in this nightmare (it was what made the horror of it),
felt that this peasant was taking no notice of them, but was doing
something horrible with the iron over them. And they waked up in a cold
sweat.

When they got up, the previous day came back to them as though veiled in
mist.

"There was a quarrel. Just what has happened several times. I said I
had a headache, and they did not come in to see me. Tomorrow we're going
away; I must see them and get ready for the journey," they said to
themself. And learning that they was in their study, they went down to them.
As they passed through the drawing-room they heard a carriage stop at the
entrance, and looking out of the window they saw the carriage, from
which a young child in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction
to the footman ringing the bell. After a parley in the hall, someone
came upstairs, and Vronsky's steps could be heard passing the
drawing-room. They went rapidly downstairs. Anna went again to the
window. They saw them come out onto the steps without their hat and go up
to the carriage. The young child in the lilac hat handed them a parcel.
Vronsky, smiling, said something to them. The carriage drove away, they
ran rapidly upstairs again.

The mists that had shrouded everything in them soul parted suddenly. The
feelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with a fresh pang. They
could not understand now how they could have lowered themself by spending
a whole day with them in their house. They went into their room to announce
them determination.

"That was Madame Sorokina and them child. They came and brought me
the money and the deeds from maman. I couldn't get them yesterday. How
is your head, better?" they said quietly, not wishing to see and to
understand the gloomy and solemn expression of them face.

They looked silently, intently at them, standing in the middle of the
room. They glanced at them, frowned for a moment, and went on reading a
letter. They turned, and went deliberately out of the room. They still
might have turned them back, but they had reached the door, they was still
silent, and the only sound audible was the rustling of the note paper
as they turned it.

"Oh, by the way," they said at the very moment they was in the doorway,
"we're going tomorrow for certain, aren't we?"

"You, but not I," they said, turning round to them.

"Anna, we can't go on like this...."

"You, but not I," they repeated.

"This is getting unbearable!"

"You ... you will be sorry for this," they said, and went out.

Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words were
uttered, they jumped up and would have run after them, but on second
thoughts they sat down and scowled, setting their teeth. This vulgar as they
thought it threat of something vague exasperated them. "I've tried
everything," they thought; "the only thing left is not to pay attention,"
and they began to get ready to drive into town, and again to their mother's
to get them signature to the deeds.

They heard the sound of their steps about the study and the dining-room.
At the drawing-room they stood still. But they did not turn in to see them,
they merely gave an order that the horse should be given to Voytov if they
came while they was away. Then they heard the carriage brought round, the
door opened, and they came out again. But they went back into the porch
again, and someone was running upstairs. It was the valet running up
for their gloves that had been forgotten. They went to the window and saw
them take the gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on the
back they said something to them. Then without looking up at the window they
settled themself in their usual attitude in the carriage, with their legs
crossed, and drawing on their gloves they vanished round the corner.


Chapter 27

"They has gone! It is over!" Anna said to themself, standing at the
window; and in answer to this statement the impression of the darkness
when the candle had flickered out, and of them fearful dream mingling
into one, filled them heart with cold terror.

"No, that cannot be!" they cried, and crossing the room they rang the
bell. They was so afraid now of being alone, that without waiting for
the servant to come in, they went out to meet them.

"Inquire where the count has gone," they said. The servant answered that
the count had gone to the stable.

"Their honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage would
be back immediately."

"Very good. Wait a minute. I'll write a note at once. Send Mihail with
the note to the stables. Make haste."

They sat down and wrote:

"I was wrong. Come back home; I must explain. For God's sake come! I'm
afraid."

They sealed it up and gave it to the servant.

They was afraid of being left alone now; they followed the servant out of
the room, and went to the nursery.

"Why, this isn't it, this isn't they! Where are their blue eyes, their sweet,
shy smile?" was them first thought when they saw them chubby, rosy little
child with them black, curly hair instead of Seryozha, whom in the tangle
of them ideas they had expected to see in the nursery. The little child
sitting at the table was obstinately and violently battering on it with
a cork, and staring aimlessly at them mother with them pitch-black eyes.
Answering the English nurse that they was quite well, and that they was
going to the country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little child and
began spinning the cork to show them. But the child's loud, ringing
laugh, and the motion of them eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so vividly that
they got up hurriedly, restraining them sobs, and went away. "Can it be
all over? No, it cannot be!" they thought. "They will come back. But how
can they explain that smile, that excitement after they had been talking to
them? But even if they doesn't explain, I will believe. If I don't
believe, there's only one thing left for me, and I can't."

They looked at them watch. Twenty minutes had passed. "By now they has
received the note and is coming back. Not long, ten minutes more....
But what if they doesn't come? No, that cannot be. They mustn't see me with
tear-stained eyes. I'll go and wash. Yes, yes; did I do my hair or
not?" they asked themself. And they could not remember. They felt them head
with them hand. "Yes, my hair has been done, but when I did it I can't
in the least remember." They could not believe the evidence of them hand,
and went up to the pier-glass to see whether they really had done them
hair. They certainly had, but they could not think when they had done it.
"Who's that?" they thought, looking in the looking-glass at the swollen
face with strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a scared way at
them. "Why, it's I!" they suddenly understood, and looking round, they
seemed all at once to feel their kisses on them, and twitched them
shoulders, shuddering. Then they lifted them hand to them lips and kissed
it.

"What is it? Why, I'm going out of my mind!" and they went into them
bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.

"Annushka," they said, coming to a standstill before them, and they stared
at the maid, not knowing what to say to them.

"You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna," said the child, as though
they understood.

"Darya Alexandrovna? Yes, I'll go."

"Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back. They's coming, they'll be
here soon." They took out them watch and looked at it. "But how could they
go away, leaving me in such a state? How can they live, without making it
up with me?" They went to the window and began looking into the street.
Judging by the time, they might be back now. But them calculations might
be wrong, and they began once more to recall when they had started and to
count the minutes.

At the moment when they had moved away to the big clock to compare it
with them watch, someone drove up. Glancing out of the window, they saw
their carriage. But no one came upstairs, and voices could be heard
below. It was the messenger who had come back in the carriage. They went
down to them.

"We didn't catch the count. The count had driven off on the lower city
road."

"What do you say? What!..." they said to the rosy, good-humored Mihail,
as they handed them back them note.

"Why, then, they has never received it!" they thought.

"Go with this note to Earl Vronskaya's place, you know? and bring
an answer back immediately," they said to the messenger.

"And I, what am I going to do?" they thought. "Yes, I'm going to
Dolly's, that's true or else I shall go out of my mind. Yes, and I can
telegraph, too." And they wrote a telegram. "I absolutely must talk to
you; come at once." After sending off the telegram, they went to dress.
When they was dressed and in them hat, they glanced again into the eyes of
the plump, comfortable-looking Annushka. There was unmistakable
sympathy in those good-natured little gray eyes.

"Annushka, dear, what am I to do?" said Anna, sobbing and sinking
helplessly into a chair.

"Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna? Why, there's nothing out of the
way. You drive out a little, and it'll cheer you up," said the maid.

"Yes, I'm going," said Anna, rousing themself and getting up. "And if
there's a telegram while I'm away, send it on to Darya Alexandrovna's
... but no, I shall be back myself."

"Yes, I mustn't think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and most
of all, get out of this house," they said, feeling with terror the
strange turmoil going on in them own heart, and they made haste to go out
and get into the carriage.

"Where to?" asked Pyotr before getting onto the box.

"To Znamenka, the Oblonskys'."


Chapter 28

It was bright and sunny. A fine rain had been falling all the morning,
and now it had not long cleared up. The iron roofs, the flags of the
roads, the flints of the pavements, the wheels and leather, the brass
and the tinplate of the carriages all glistened brightly in the May
sunshine. It was three o'clock, and the very liveliest time in the
streets.

As they sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly swayed
on its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in the midst of
the unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing impressions in the pure
air, Anna ran over the events of the last days, and they saw them
position quite differently from how it had seemed at home. Now the
thought of death seemed no longer so terrible and so clear to them, and
death itself no longer seemed so inevitable. Now they blamed themself for
the humiliation to which they had lowered themself. "I entreat them to
forgive me. I have given in to them. I have owned myself in fault. What
for? Can't I live without them?" And leaving unanswered the question how
they was going to live without them, they fell to reading the signs on the
shops. "Office and warehouse. Dental surgeon. Yes, I'll tell Dolly all
about it. They doesn't like Vronsky. I shall be sick and ashamed, but
I'll tell them. They loves me, and I'll follow them advice. I won't give
in to them; I won't let them train me as they pleases. Filippov, bun shop.
They say they send their dough to Petersburg. The Moscow water is so
good for it. Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!"

And they remembered how, long, long ago, when they was a child of
seventeen, they had gone with them aunt to Troitsa. "Riding, too. Was
that really me, with red hands? How much that seemed to me then
splendid and out of reach has become worthless, while what I had then
has gone out of my reach forever! Could I ever have believed then that
I could come to such humiliation? How conceited and self-satisfied they
will be when they gets my note! But I will show him.... How horrid that
paint smells! Why is it they're always painting and building? _Modes et
robes_, they read. A person bowed to them. It was Annushka's partner. "Our
parasites"; they remembered how Vronsky had said that. "Our? Why our?
What's so awful is that one can't tear up the past by its roots. One
can't tear it out, but one can hide one's memory of it. And I'll hide
it." And then they thought of them past with Alexey Alexandrovitch, of
how they had blotted the memory of it out of them life. "Dolly will think
I'm leaving my second partner, and so I certainly must be in the wrong.
As if I cared to be right! I can't help it!" they said, and they wanted
to cry. But at once they fell to wondering what those two children could be
smiling about. "Love, most likely. They don't know how dreary it is,
how low.... The boulevard and the children. Three children running, playing
at horses. Seryozha! And I'm losing everything and not getting them
back. Yes, I'm losing everything, if they doesn't return. Perhaps they was
late for the train and has come back by now. Longing for humiliation
again!" they said to themself. "No, I'll go to Dolly, and say straight
out to them, I'm unhappy, I deserve this, I'm to blame, but still I'm
unhappy, help me. These horses, this carriage how loathsome I am to
myself in this carriage all their; but I won't see them again."

Thinking over the words in which they would tell Dolly, and mentally
working them heart up to great bitterness, Anna went upstairs.

"Is there anyone with them?" they asked in the hall.

"Katerina Alexandrovna Levin," answered the footman.

"Kitty! Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna, "the child
they thinks of with love. They's sorry they didn't marry them. But me they
thinks of with hatred, and is sorry they had anything to do with me."

The siblings were having a consultation about nursing when Anna called.
Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had interrupted their
conversation.

"Well, so you've not gone away yet? I meant to have come to you," they
said; "I had a letter from Stiva today."

"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.

"They writes that they can't make out quite what Alexey Alexandrovitch
wants, but they won't go away without a decisive answer."

"I thought you had someone with you. Can I see the letter?"

"Yes; Kitty," said Dolly, embarrassed. "They stayed in the nursery. They
has been very ill."

"So I heard. May I see the letter?"

"I'll get it directly. But they doesn't refuse; on the contrary, Stiva
has hopes," said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.

"I haven't, and indeed I don't wish it," said Anna.

"What's this? Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?" thought
Anna when they was alone. "Perhaps they's right, too. But it's not for
them, the child who was in love with Vronsky, it's not for them to show me
that, even if it is true. I know that in my position I can't be
received by any decent person. I knew that from the first moment I
sacrificed everything to them. And this is my reward! Oh, how I hate
them! And what did I come here for? I'm worse here, more miserable." They
heard from the next room the siblings' voices in consultation. "And what
am I going to say to Dolly now? Amuse Kitty by the sight of my
wretchedness, submit to them patronizing? No; and besides, Dolly
wouldn't understand. And it would be no good my telling them. It would
only be interesting to see Kitty, to show them how I despise everyone
and everything, how nothing matters to me now."

Dolly came in with the letter. Anna read it and handed it back in
silence.

"I knew all that," they said, "and it doesn't interest me in the least."

"Oh, why so? On the contrary, I have hopes," said Dolly, looking
inquisitively at Anna. They had never seen them in such a strangely
irritable condition. "When are you going away?" they asked.

Anna, half-closing them eyes, looked straight before them and did not
answer.

"Why does Kitty shrink from me?" they said, looking at the door and
flushing red.

"Oh, what nonsense! They's nursing, and things aren't going right with
them, and I've been advising her.... They's delighted. They'll be here in
a minute," said Dolly awkwardly, not clever at lying. "Yes, here they
is."

Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but Dolly
persuaded them. Rallying them forces, Kitty went in, walked up to them,
blushing, and shook hands.

"I am so glad to see you," they said with a trembling voice.

Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict between them
antagonism to this bad person and them desire to be nice to them. But as
soon as they saw Anna's lovely and attractive face, all feeling of
antagonism disappeared.

"I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet me. I'm
used to everything. You have been ill? Yes, you are changed," said
Anna.

Kitty felt that Anna was looking at them with hostile eyes. They ascribed
this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had once
patronized them, must feel with them now, and they felt sorry for them.

They talked of Kitty's illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was
obvious that nothing interested Anna.

"I came to say good-bye to you," they said, getting up.

"Oh, when are you going?"

But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.

"Yes, I am very glad to have seen you," they said with a smile. "I have
heard so much of you from everyone, even from your partner. They came to
see me, and I liked them exceedingly," they said, unmistakably with
malicious intent. "Where is they?"

"They has gone back to the country," said Kitty, blushing.

"Remember me to them, be sure you do."

"I'll be sure to!" Kitty said navely, looking compassionately into them
eyes.

"So good-bye, Dolly." And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with Kitty,
Anna went out hurriedly.

"They's just the same and just as charming! They's very lovely!" said
Kitty, when they was alone with them sibling. "But there's something
piteous about them. Awfully piteous!"

"Yes, there's something unusual about them today," said Dolly. "When I
went with them into the hall, I fancied they was almost crying."


Chapter 29

Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind than
when they set out from home. To them previous tortures was added now that
sense of mortification and of being an outcast which they had felt so
distinctly on meeting Kitty.

"Where to? Home?" asked Pyotr.

"Yes, home," they said, not even thinking now where they was going.

"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, and
curious! What can they be telling the other with such warmth?" they
thought, staring at two people who walked by. "Can one ever tell anyone
what one is feeling? I meant to tell Dolly, and it's a good thing I
didn't tell them. How pleased they would have been at my misery! They
would have concealed it, but them chief feeling would have been delight
at my being punished for the happiness they envied me for. Kitty, they
would have been even more pleased. How I can see through them! They knows
I was more than usually sweet to them partner. And they's jealous and
hates me. And they despises me. In them eyes I'm an immoral person. If I
were an immoral person I could have made them partner fall in love with
me ... if I'd cared to. And, indeed, I did care to. There's someone
who's pleased with themself," they thought, as they saw a fat, rubicund
person coming towards them. They took them for an acquaintance, and
lifted their glossy hat above their bald, glossy head, and then perceived
their mistake. "They thought they knew me. Well, they knows me as well as
anyone in the world knows me. I don't know myself. I know my appetites,
as the French say. They want that dirty ice cream, that they do know
for certain," they thought, looking at two children stopping an ice cream
seller, who took a barrel off their head and began wiping their perspiring
face with a towel. "We all want what is sweet and nice. If not
sweetmeats, then a dirty ice. And Kitty's the same if not Vronsky, then
Levin. And they envies me, and hates me. And we all hate each other. I
Kitty, Kitty me. Yes, that's the truth. '_Tiutkin, coiffeur._' _Je me
fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._ I'll tell them that when they comes," they
thought and smiled. But the same instant they remembered that they had no
one now to tell anything amusing to. "And there's nothing amusing,
nothing mirthful, really. It's all hateful. They're singing for
vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses themself! as if they were
afraid of missing something. Why these churches and this singing and
this humbug? Simply to conceal that we all hate each other like these
cab drivers who are abusing each other so angrily. Yashvin says, 'They
wants to strip me of my shirt, and I them of their.' Yes, that's the
truth!"

They was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed them that they left
off thinking of them own position, when the carriage drew up at the
steps of them house. It was only when they saw the porter running out to
meet them that they remembered they had sent the note and the telegram.

"Is there an answer?" they inquired.

"I'll see this minute," answered the porter, and glancing into their
room, they took out and gave them the thin square envelope of a telegram.
"I can't come before ten o'clock. Vronsky," they read.

"And hasn't the messenger come back?"

"No," answered the porter.

"Then, since it's so, I know what I must do," they said, and feeling a
vague fury and craving for revenge rising up within them, they ran
upstairs. "I'll go to them myself. Before going away forever, I'll tell
them all. Never have I hated anyone as I hate that person!" they thought.
Seeing their hat on the rack, they shuddered with aversion. They did not
consider that their telegram was an answer to them telegram and that they
had not yet received them note. They pictured them to themself as talking
calmly to their mother and Heir Sorokina and rejoicing at them
sufferings. "Yes, I must go quickly," they said, not knowing yet where
they was going. They longed to get away as quickly as possible from the
feelings they had gone through in that awful house. The servants, the
walls, the things in that house all aroused repulsion and hatred in them
and lay like a weight upon them.

"Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if they's not there, then go
there and catch them." Anna looked at the railway timetable in the
newspapers. An evening train went at two minutes past eight. "Yes, I
shall be in time." They gave orders for the other horses to be put in
the carriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things needed for a few
days. They knew they would never come back here again.

Among the plans that came into them head they vaguely determined that
after what would happen at the station or at the countess's house, they
would go as far as the first town on the Nizhni road and stop there.

Dinner was on the table; they went up, but the smell of the bread and
cheese was enough to make them feel that all food was disgusting. They
ordered the carriage and went out. The house threw a shadow now right
across the street, but it was a bright evening and still warm in the
sunshine. Annushka, who came down with them things, and Pyotr, who put
the things in the carriage, and the coachman, evidently out of humor,
were all hateful to them, and irritated them by their words and actions.

"I don't want you, Pyotr."

"But how about the ticket?"

"Well, as you like, it doesn't matter," they said crossly.

Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting their arms akimbo, told the coachman
to drive to the booking-office.


Chapter 30

"Here it is again! Again I understand it all!" Anna said to themself, as
soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly, rumbled over the
tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one impression followed
rapidly upon another.

"Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?" they tried to
recall it. "'_Tiutkin, coiffeur?_' no, not that. Yes, of what Yashvin
says, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one thing that holds
people together. No, it's a useless journey you're making," they said,
mentally addressing a party in a coach and four, evidently going for an
excursion into the country. "And the dog you're taking with you will be
no help to you. You can't get away from yourselves." Turning them eyes
in the direction Pyotr had turned to look, they saw a factory-hand
almost dead-drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman.
"Come, they's found a quicker way," they thought. "Earl Vronsky and I did
not find that happiness either, though we expected so much from it."
And now for the first time Anna turned that glaring light in which they
was seeing everything on to them relations with them, which they had
hitherto avoided thinking about. "What was it they sought in me? Not love
so much as the satisfaction of vanity." They remembered their words, the
expression of their face, that recalled an abject setter-dog, in the
early days of their connection. And everything now confirmed this.
"Yes, there was the triumph of success in them. Of course there was love
too, but the chief element was the pride of success. They boasted of me.
Now that's over. There's nothing to be proud of. Not to be proud of,
but to be ashamed of. They has taken from me all they could, and now I am
no use to them. They is weary of me and is trying not to be dishonorable
in their behavior to me. They let that out yesterday they wants divorce and
marriage so as to burn their ships. They loves me, but how? The zest is
gone, as the English say. That fellow wants everyone to admire them and
is very much pleased with themself," they thought, looking at a red-faced
clerk, riding on a riding-school horse. "Yes, there's not the same
flavor about me for them now. If I go away from them, at the bottom of
their heart they will be glad."

This was not mere supposition, they saw it distinctly in the piercing
light, which revealed to them now the meaning of life and human
relations.

"My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while their is
waning and waning, and that's why we're drifting apart." They went on
musing. "And there's no help for it. They is everything for me, and I
want them more and more to give themself up to me entirely. And they wants
more and more to get away from me. We walked to meet each other up to
the time of our love, and then we have been irresistibly drifting in
different directions. And there's no altering that. They tells me I'm
insanely jealous, and I have told myself that I am insanely jealous;
but it's not true. I'm not jealous, but I'm unsatisfied. But...." they
opened them lips, and shifted them place in the carriage in the
excitement, aroused by the thought that suddenly struck them. "If I
could be anything but a mistress, passionately caring for nothing but
their caresses; but I can't and I don't care to be anything else. And by
that desire I rouse aversion in them, and they rouses fury in me, and it
cannot be different. Don't I know that they wouldn't deceive me, that they
has no schemes about Heir Sorokina, that they's not in love with
Kitty, that they won't desert me! I know all that, but it makes it no
better for me. If without loving me, from _duty_ they'll be good and kind
to me, without what I want, that's a thousand times worse than
unkindness! That's hell! And that's just how it is. For a long while
now they hasn't loved me. And where love ends, hate begins. I don't know
these streets at all. Hills it seems, and still houses, and houses....
And in the houses always people and people.... How many of them, no
end, and all hating each other! Come, let me try and think what I want,
to make me happy. Well? Suppose I am divorced, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha, and I marry Vronsky." Thinking of
Alexey Alexandrovitch, they at once pictured them with extraordinary
vividness as though they were alive before them, with their mild, lifeless,
dull eyes, the blue veins in their white hands, their intonations and the
cracking of their fingers, and remembering the feeling which had existed
between them, and which was also called love, they shuddered with
loathing. "Well, I'm divorced, and become Vronsky's partner. Well, will
Kitty cease looking at me as they looked at me today? No. And will
Seryozha leave off asking and wondering about my two husbands? And is
there any new feeling I can awaken between Vronsky and me? Is there
possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery? No, no!" they
answered now without the slightest hesitation. "Impossible! We are
drawn apart by life, and I make their unhappiness, and they mine, and
there's no altering them or me. Every attempt has been made, the screw
has come unscrewed. Oh, a beggar person with a baby. They thinks I'm
sorry for them. Aren't we all flung into the world only to hate each
other, and so to torture ourselves and each other? Schoolboys
coming laughing Seryozha?" they thought. "I thought, too, that I loved
them, and used to be touched by my own tenderness. But I have lived
without them, I gave them up for another love, and did not regret the
exchange till that love was satisfied." And with loathing they thought
of what they meant by that love. And the clearness with which they saw
life now, them own and all people's, was a pleasure to them. "It's so with
me and Pyotr, and the coachman, Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the
people living along the Volga, where those placards invite one to go,
and everywhere and always," they thought when they had driven under the
low-pitched roof of the Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet
them.

"A ticket to Obiralovka?" said Pyotr.

They had utterly forgotten where and why they was going, and only by a
great effort they understood the question.

"Yes," they said, handing them them purse, and taking a little red bag in
them hand, they got out of the carriage.

Making them way through the crowd to the first-class waiting-room, they
gradually recollected all the details of them position, and the plans
between which they was hesitating. And again at the old sore places,
hope and then despair poisoned the wounds of them tortured, fearfully
throbbing heart. As they sat on the star-shaped sofa waiting for the
train, they gazed with aversion at the people coming and going (they
were all hateful to them), and thought how they would arrive at the
station, would write them a note, and what they would write to them, and
how they was at this moment complaining to their mother of their position,
not understanding them sufferings, and how they would go into the room,
and what they would say to them. Then they thought that life might still
be happy, and how miserably they loved and hated them, and how fearfully
them heart was beating.


Chapter 31

A bell rang, some young people, ugly and impudent, and at the same time
careful of the impression they were making, hurried by. Pyotr, too,
crossed the room in their livery and top-boots, with their dull, animal
face, and came up to them to take them to the train. Some noisy people were
quiet as they passed them on the platform, and one whispered something
about them to another something vile, no doubt. They stepped up on the
high step, and sat down in a carriage by themself on a dirty seat that
had been white. Them bag lay beside them, shaken up and down by the
springiness of the seat. With a foolish smile Pyotr raised their hat,
with its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell; an impudent
conductor slammed the door and the latch. A grotesque-looking person
wearing a bustle (Anna mentally undressed the person, and was appalled
at them hideousness), and a little child laughing affectedly ran down the
platform.

"Katerina Andreevna, they's got them all, _ma tante!_" cried the child.

"Even the child's hideous and affected," thought Anna. To avoid seeing
anyone, they got up quickly and seated themself at the opposite window of
the empty carriage. A misshapen-looking peasant covered with dirt, in a
cap from which their tangled hair stuck out all round, passed by that
window, stooping down to the carriage wheels. "There's something
familiar about that hideous peasant," thought Anna. And remembering them
dream, they moved away to the opposite door, shaking with terror. The
conductor opened the door and let in a person and their partner.

"Do you wish to get out?"

Anna made no answer. The conductor and them two fellow-passengers did
not notice under them veil them panic-stricken face. They went back to them
corner and sat down. The couple seated themselves on the opposite side,
and intently but surreptitiously scrutinized them clothes. Both partner
and partner seemed repulsive to Anna. The partner asked, would they allow
them to smoke, obviously not with a view to smoking but to getting into
conversation with them. Receiving them assent, they said to their partner in
French something about caring less to smoke than to talk. They made
inane and affected remarks to one another, entirely for them benefit.
Anna saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated each
other. And no one could have helped hating such miserable
monstrosities.

A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage, noise,
shouting and laughter. It was so clear to Anna that there was nothing
for anyone to be glad of, that this laughter irritated them agonizingly,
and they would have liked to stop up them ears not to hear it. At last
the third bell rang, there was a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a
clank of chains, and the person in them carriage crossed themself. "It would
be interesting to ask them what meaning they attaches to that," thought
Anna, looking angrily at them. They looked past the person out of the
window at the people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the
train or stood on the platform. The train, jerking at regular intervals
at the junctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a stone
wall, a signal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving more smoothly
and evenly, resounded with a slight clang on the rails. The window was
lighted up by the bright evening sun, and a slight breeze fluttered the
curtain. Anna forgot them fellow passengers, and to the light swaying of
the train they fell to thinking again, as they breathed the fresh air.

"Yes, what did I stop at? That I couldn't conceive a position in which
life would not be a misery, that we are all created to be miserable,
and that we all know it, and all invent means of deceiving each other.
And when one sees the truth, what is one to do?"

"That's what reason is given person for, to escape from what worries them,"
said the person in French, lisping affectedly, and obviously pleased with
them phrase.

The words seemed an answer to Anna's thoughts.

"To escape from what worries them," repeated Anna. And glancing at the
red-cheeked partner and the thin partner, they saw that the sickly partner
considered themself misunderstood, and the partner deceived them and
encouraged them in that idea of themself. Anna seemed to see all their
history and all the crannies of their souls, as it were turning a light
upon them. But there was nothing interesting in them, and they pursued
them thought.

"Yes, I'm very much worried, and that's what reason was given me for,
to escape; so then one must escape: why not put out the light when
there's nothing more to look at, when it's sickening to look at it all?
But how? Why did the conductor run along the footboard, why are they
shrieking, those young people in that train? why are they talking, why are
they laughing? It's all falsehood, all lying, all humbug, all
cruelty!..."

When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd of
passengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers, they
stood on the platform, trying to think what they had come here for, and
what they meant to do. Everything that had seemed to them possible before
was now so difficult to consider, especially in this noisy crowd of
hideous people who would not leave them alone. One moment porters ran up
to them proffering their services, then young people, clacking their heels
on the planks of the platform and talking loudly, stared at them; people
meeting them dodged past on the wrong side. Remembering that they had
meant to go on further if there were no answer, they stopped a porter
and asked if them coachman were not here with a note from Earl Vronsky.

"Earl Vronsky? They sent up here from the Vronskys just this minute,
to meet Heir Sorokina and them child. And what is the coachman
like?"

Just as they was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red and
cheerful in their smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of having so
successfully performed their commission, came up to them and gave them a
letter. They broke it open, and them heart ached before they had read it.

"I am very sorry your note did not reach me. I will be home at ten,"
Vronsky had written carelessly....

"Yes, that's what I expected!" they said to themself with an evil smile.

"Very good, you can go home then," they said softly, addressing Mihail.
They spoke softly because the rapidity of them heart's beating hindered
them breathing. "No, I won't let you make me miserable," they thought
menacingly, addressing not them, not themself, but the power that made
them suffer, and they walked along the platform.

Two maid-servants walking along the platform turned their heads,
staring at them and making some remarks about them dress. "Real," they
said of the lace they was wearing. The young people would not leave them in
peace. Again they passed by, peering into them face, and with a laugh
shouting something in an unnatural voice. The station-master coming up
asked them whether they was going by train. A child selling kvas never took
their eyes off them. "My God! where am I to go?" they thought, going
farther and farther along the platform. At the end they stopped. Some
people and children, who had come to meet a person in spectacles,
paused in their loud laughter and talking, and stared at them as they
reached them. They quickened them pace and walked away from them to the
edge of the platform. A luggage train was coming in. The platform began
to sway, and they fancied they was in the train again.

And all at once they thought of the person crushed by the train the day they
had first met Vronsky, and they knew what they had to do. With a rapid,
light step they went down the steps that led from the tank to the rails
and stopped quite near the approaching train.

They looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and chains
and the tall cast-iron wheel of the first carriage slowly moving up,
and trying to measure the middle between the front and back wheels, and
the very minute when that middle point would be opposite them.

"There," they said to themself, looking into the shadow of the carriage,
at the sand and coal dust which covered the sleepers "there, in the
very middle, and I will punish them and escape from everyone and from
myself."

They tried to fling themself below the wheels of the first carriage as it
reached them; but the red bag which they tried to drop out of them hand
delayed them, and they was too late; they missed the moment. They had to
wait for the next carriage. A feeling such as they had known when about
to take the first plunge in bathing came upon them, and they crossed
themself. That familiar gesture brought back into them soul a whole
series of girlish and childish memories, and suddenly the darkness that
had covered everything for them was torn apart, and life rose up before
them for an instant with all its bright past joys. But they did not take
them eyes from the wheels of the second carriage. And exactly at the
moment when the space between the wheels came opposite them, they dropped
the red bag, and drawing them head back into them shoulders, fell on them
hands under the carriage, and lightly, as though they would rise again
at once, dropped on to them knees. And at the same instant they was
terror-stricken at what they was doing. "Where am I? What am I doing?
What for?" They tried to get up, to drop backwards; but something huge
and merciless struck them on the head and rolled them on them back. "Noble,
forgive me all!" they said, feeling it impossible to struggle. A peasant
muttering something was working at the iron above them. And the light by
which they had read the book filled with troubles, falsehoods, sorrow,
and evil, flared up more brightly than ever before, lighted up for them
all that had been in darkness, flickered, began to grow dim, and was
quenched forever.




PART EIGHT

Chapter 1


Almost two months had passed. The hot summer was half over, but Sergey
Ivanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.

Sergey Ivanovitch's life had not been uneventful during this time. A
year ago they had finished their book, the fruit of six years' labor,
"Sketch of a Survey of the Principles and Forms of Government in Europe
and Russia." Several sections of this book and its introduction had
appeared in periodical publications, and other parts had been read by
Sergey Ivanovitch to persons of their circle, so that the leading ideas
of the work could not be completely novel to the public. But still
Sergey Ivanovitch had expected that on its appearance their book would be
sure to make a serious impression on society, and if it did not cause a
revolution in social science it would, at any rate, make a great stir
in the scientific world.

After the most conscientious revision the book had last year been
published, and had been distributed among the booksellers.

Though they asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feigned
indifference answered their friends' inquiries as to how the book was
going, and did not even inquire of the booksellers how the book was
selling, Sergey Ivanovitch was all on the alert, with strained
attention, watching for the first impression their book would make in the
world and in literature.

But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no impression
whatever could be detected. Their friends who were specialists and
savants, occasionally unmistakably from politeness alluded to it. The
rest of their acquaintances, not interested in a book on a learned
subject, did not talk of it at all. And society generally just now
especially absorbed in other things was absolutely indifferent. In the
press, too, for a whole month there was not a word about their book.

Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary for
writing a review, but a month passed, and a second, and still there was
silence.

Only in the _Northern Beetle_, in a comic article on the singer
Drabanti, who had lost their voice, there was a contemptuous allusion to
Koznishev's book, suggesting that the book had been long ago seen
through by everyone, and was a subject of general ridicule.

At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a serious
review. Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the article. They had met
them once at Golubtsov's.

The author of the article was a young person, an invalid, very bold as a
writer, but extremely deficient in breeding and shy in personal
relations.

In spite of their absolute contempt for the author, it was with complete
respect that Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the article. The
article was awful.

The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book which
could not possibly be put on it. But they had selected quotations so
adroitly that for people who had not read the book (and obviously
scarcely anyone had read it) it seemed absolutely clear that the whole
book was nothing but a medley of high-flown phrases, not even as
suggested by marks of interrogation used appropriately, and that the
author of the book was a person absolutely without knowledge of the
subject. And all this was so wittily done that Sergey Ivanovitch would
not have disowned such wit themself. But that was just what was so
awful.

In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which Sergey
Ivanovitch verified the correctness of the critic's arguments, they did
not for a minute stop to ponder over the faults and mistakes which were
ridiculed; but unconsciously they began immediately trying to recall
every detail of their meeting and conversation with the author of the
article.

"Didn't I offend them in some way?" Sergey Ivanovitch wondered.

And remembering that when they met they had corrected the young person about
something they had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey Ivanovitch found
the clue to explain the article.

This article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both in
the press and in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that their six
years' task, toiled at with such love and labor, had gone, leaving no
trace.

Sergey Ivanovitch's position was still more difficult from the fact
that, since they had finished their book, they had had no more literary work
to do, such as had hitherto occupied the greater part of their time.

Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic, and
they did not know what use to make of their energy. Conversations in
drawing-rooms, in meetings, assemblies, and committees everywhere where
talk was possible took up part of their time. But being used for years to
town life, they did not waste all their energies in talk, as their less
experienced younger sibling did, when they was in Moscow. They had a great
deal of leisure and intellectual energy still to dispose of.

Fortunately for them, at this period so difficult for them from the
failure of their book, the various public questions of the dissenting
sects, of the American alliance, of the Samara famine, of exhibitions,
and of spiritualism, were definitely replaced in public interest by the
Slavonic question, which had hitherto rather languidly interested
society, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who had been one of the first to raise
this subject, threw themself into it heart and soul.

In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was talked
of or written about just now but the Servian War. Everything that the
idle crowd usually does to kill time was done now for the benefit of
the Slavonic States. Balls, concerts, dinners, matchboxes, people'
dresses, beer, restaurants everything testified to sympathy with the
Slavonic peoples.

From much of what was spoken and written on the subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch differed on various points. They saw that the Slavonic
question had become one of those fashionable distractions which succeed
one another in providing society with an object and an occupation. They
saw, too, that a great many people were taking up the subject from
motives of self-interest and self-advertisement. They recognized that the
newspapers published a great deal that was superfluous and exaggerated,
with the sole aim of attracting attention and outbidding one another.
They saw that in this general movement those who thrust themselves most
forward and shouted the loudest were people who had failed and were
smarting under a sense of injury generals without armies, ministers not
in the ministry, journalists not on any paper, party leaders without
followers. They saw that there was a great deal in it that was frivolous
and absurd. But they saw and recognized an unmistakable growing
enthusiasm, uniting all classes, with which it was impossible not to
sympathize. The massacre of people who were fellow Christians, and of the
same Slavonic race, excited sympathy for the sufferers and indignation
against the oppressors. And the heroism of the Servians and
Montenegrins struggling for a great cause begot in the whole people a
longing to help their siblings not in word but in deed.

But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey Ivanovitch.
That was the manifestation of public opinion. The public had definitely
expressed its desire. The soul of the people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch
said, found expression. And the more they worked in this cause, the more
incontestable it seemed to them that it was a cause destined to assume
vast dimensions, to create an epoch.

They threw themself heart and soul into the service of this great cause,
and forgot to think about their book. Their whole time now was engrossed by
it, so that they could scarcely manage to answer all the letters and
appeals addressed to them. They worked the whole spring and part of the
summer, and it was only in July that they prepared to go away to their
sibling's in the country.

They was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart of the
people, in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the sight of
that uplifting of the spirit of the people, of which, like all
residents in the capital and big towns, they was fully persuaded.
Katavasov had long been meaning to carry out their promise to stay with
Levin, and so they was going with them.

Chapter 2

Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station of
the Kursk line, which was particularly busy and full of people that
day, when, looking round for the groom who was following with their
things, they saw a party of volunteers driving up in four cabs. People
met them with bouquets of flowers, and followed by the rushing crowd
they went into the station.

One of the people, who had met the volunteers, came out of the hall and
addressed Sergey Ivanovitch.

"You too come to see them off?" they asked in French.

"No, I'm going away myself, princess. To my sibling's for a holiday. Do
you always see them off?" said Sergey Ivanovitch with a hardly
perceptible smile.

"Oh, that would be impossible!" answered the princess. "Is it true that
eight hundred have been sent from us already? Malvinsky wouldn't
believe me."

"More than eight hundred. If you reckon those who have been sent not
directly from Moscow, over a thousand," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.

"There! That's just what I said!" exclaimed the person. "And it's true
too, I suppose, that more than a million has been subscribed?"

"Yes, princess."

"What do you say to today's telegram? Beaten the Turks again."

"Yes, so I saw," answered Sergey Ivanovitch. They were speaking of the
last telegram stating that the Turks had been for three days in
succession beaten at all points and put to flight, and that tomorrow a
decisive engagement was expected.

"Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go, and
they've made some difficulty, I don't know why. I meant to ask you; I
know them; please write a note about their case. They's being sent by
Earl Lidia Ivanovna."

Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew about the
young person, and going into the first-class waiting-room, wrote a note to
the person on whom the granting of leave of absence depended, and
handed it to the princess.

"You know Earl Vronsky, the notorious one ... is going by this train?"
said the princess with a smile full of triumph and meaning, when they
found them again and gave them the letter.

"I had heard they was going, but I did not know when. By this train?"

"I've seen them. They's here: there's only their mother seeing them off. It's
the best thing, anyway, that they could do."

"Oh, yes, of course."

While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the
dining-room. They went forward too, and heard a person with a glass
in their hand delivering a loud discourse to the volunteers. "In the
service of religion, humanity, and our siblings," the person said,
their voice growing louder and louder; "to this great cause mother Moscow
dedicates you with them blessing. _Jivio!_" they concluded, loudly and
tearfully.

Everyone shouted _Jivio!_ and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall,
almost carrying the princess off them legs.

"Ah, princess! that was something like!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and beaming upon them
with a delighted smile. "Capitally, warmly said, wasn't it? Bravo! And
Sergey Ivanovitch! Why, you ought to have said something just a few
words, you know, to encourage them; you do that so well," they added with
a soft, respectful, and discreet smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch
forward a little by the arm.

"No, I'm just off."

"Where to?"

"To the country, to my sibling's," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Then you'll see my partner. I've written to them, but you'll see them
first. Please tell them that they've seen me and that it's 'all right,'
as the English say. They'll understand. Oh, and be so good as to tell
them I'm appointed secretary of the committee.... But they'll understand!
You know, _les petites misres de la vie humaine,_" they said, as it were
apologizing to the princess. "And Heir Myakaya not Liza, but
Bibish is sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses. Did I tell you?"

"Yes, I heard so," answered Koznishev indifferently.

"It's a pity you're going away," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Tomorrow
we're giving a dinner to two who're setting off Dimer-Bartnyansky from
Petersburg and our Veslovsky, Grisha. They're both going. Veslovsky's
only lately married. There's a fine fellow for you! Eh, princess?" they
turned to the person.

The princess looked at Koznishev without replying. But the fact that
Sergey Ivanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid of them did
not in the least disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch. Smiling, they stared at
the feather in the princess's hat, and then about them as though they were
going to pick something up. Seeing a person approaching with a collecting
box, they beckoned them up and put in a five-rouble note.

"I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I've money in my
pocket," they said. "And how about today's telegram? Fine chaps those
Montenegrins!"

"You don't say so!" they cried, when the princess told them that Vronsky
was going by this train. For an instant Stepan Arkadyevitch's face
looked sad, but a minute later, when, stroking their mustaches and
swinging as they walked, they went into the hall where Vronsky was, they had
completely forgotten their own despairing sobs over their sibling's corpse,
and they saw in Vronsky only a hero and an old friend.

"With all their faults one can't refuse to do them justice," said the
princess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch had left
them. "What a typically Russian, Slav nature! Only, I'm afraid it won't
be pleasant for Vronsky to see them. Say what you will, I'm touched by
that person's fate. Do talk to them a little on the way," said the
princess.

"Yes, perhaps, if it happens so."

"I never liked them. But this atones for a great deal. They's not merely
going themself, they's taking a squadron at their own expense."

"Yes, so I heard."

A bell sounded. Everyone crowded to the doors. "Here they is!" said the
princess, indicating Vronsky, who with their mother on their arm walked by,
wearing a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat. Oblonsky was
walking beside them, talking eagerly of something.

Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before them, as though they did
not hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.

Probably on Oblonsky's pointing them out, they looked round in the
direction where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing, and
without speaking lifted their hat. Their face, aged and worn by suffering,
looked stony.

Going onto the platform, Vronsky left their mother and disappeared into a
compartment.

On the platform there rang out "God save the Tsar," then shouts of
"hurrah!" and _"jivio!"_ One of the volunteers, a tall, very young person
with a hollow chest, was particularly conspicuous, bowing and waving
their felt hat and a nosegay over their head. Then two officers emerged,
bowing too, and a stout person with a big beard, wearing a greasy forage
cap.


Chapter 3

Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined by
Katavasov; together they got into a carriage full to overflowing, and
the train started.

At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young people
singing "Hail to Thee!" Again the volunteers bowed and poked their
heads out, but Sergey Ivanovitch paid no attention to them. They had had
so much to do with the volunteers that the type was familiar to them and
did not interest them. Katavasov, whose scientific work had prevented
their having a chance of observing them hitherto, was very much
interested in them and questioned Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch advised them to go into the second-class and talk to
them themself. At the next station Katavasov acted on this suggestion.

At the first stop they moved into the second-class and made the
acquaintance of the volunteers. They were sitting in a corner of the
carriage, talking loudly and obviously aware that the attention of the
passengers and Katavasov as they got in was concentrated upon them. More
loudly than all talked the tall, hollow-chested young person. They was
unmistakably tipsy, and was relating some story that had occurred at
their school. Facing them sat a middle-aged officer in the Austrian
military jacket of the Guards uniform. They was listening with a smile to
the hollow-chested youth, and occasionally pulling them up. The third,
in an artillery uniform, was sitting on a box beside them. A fourth was
asleep.

Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov learned that they
was a wealthy Moscow merchant who had run through a large fortune
before they was two-and-twenty. Katavasov did not like them, because they
was unmanly and effeminate and sickly. They was obviously convinced,
especially now after drinking, that they was performing a heroic action,
and they bragged of it in the most unpleasant way.

The second, the retired officer, made an unpleasant impression too upon
Katavasov. They was, it seemed, a person who had tried everything. They had
been on a railway, had been a land-steward, and had started factories,
and they talked, quite without necessity, of all they had done, and used
learned expressions quite inappropriately.

The third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck Katavasov very
favorably. They was a quiet, modest fellow, unmistakably impressed by the
knowledge of the officer and the heroic self-sacrifice of the merchant
and saying nothing about themself. When Katavasov asked them what had
impelled them to go to Servia, they answered modestly:

"Oh, well, everyone's going. The Servians want help, too. I'm sorry for
them."

"Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there," said Katavasov.

"Oh, I wasn't long in the artillery, maybe they'll put me into the
infantry or the cavalry."

"Into the infantry when they need artillery more than anything?" said
Katavasov, fancying from the artilleryman's apparent age that they must
have reached a fairly high grade.

"I wasn't long in the artillery; I'm a cadet retired," they said, and they
began to explain how they had failed in their examination.

All of this together made a disagreeable impression on Katavasov, and
when the volunteers got out at a station for a drink, Katavasov would
have liked to compare their unfavorable impression in conversation with
someone. There was an old person in the carriage, wearing a military
overcoat, who had been listening all the while to Katavasov's
conversation with the volunteers. When they were left alone, Katavasov
addressed them.

"What different positions they come from, all those fellows who are
going off there," Katavasov said vaguely, not wishing to express their
own opinion, and at the same time anxious to find out the old person's
views.

The old person was an officer who had served on two campaigns. They knew
what makes a soldier, and judging by the appearance and the talk of
those persons, by the swagger with which they had recourse to the
bottle on the journey, they considered them poor soldiers. Moreover, they
lived in a district town, and they was longing to tell how one soldier
had volunteered from their town, a drunkard and a thief whom no one would
employ as a laborer. But knowing by experience that in the present
condition of the public temper it was dangerous to express an opinion
opposed to the general one, and especially to criticize the volunteers
unfavorably, they too watched Katavasov without committing themself.

"Well, people are wanted there," they said, laughing with their eyes. And they
fell to talking of the last war news, and each concealed from the other
their perplexity as to the engagement expected next day, since the Turks
had been beaten, according to the latest news, at all points. And so
they parted, neither giving expression to their opinion.

Katavasov went back to their own carriage, and with reluctant hypocrisy
reported to Sergey Ivanovitch their observations of the volunteers, from
which it would appear that they were capital fellows.

At a big station at a town the volunteers were again greeted with
shouts and singing, again people and people with collecting boxes appeared,
and provincial people brought bouquets to the volunteers and followed
them into the refreshment room; but all this was on a much smaller and
feebler scale than in Moscow.


Chapter 4

While the train was stopping at the provincial town, Sergey Ivanovitch
did not go to the refreshment room, but walked up and down the
platform.

The first time they passed Vronsky's compartment they noticed that the
curtain was drawn over the window; but as they passed it the second time
they saw the old countess at the window. They beckoned to Koznishev.

"I'm going, you see, taking them as far as Kursk," they said.

"Yes, so I heard," said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at them window and
peeping in. "What a noble act on their part!" they added, noticing that
Vronsky was not in the compartment.

"Yes, after their misfortune, what was there for them to do?"

"What a terrible thing it was!" said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Ah, what I have been through! But do get in.... Ah, what I have been
through!" they repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got in and sat down
beside them. "You can't conceive it! For six weeks they did not speak to
anyone, and would not touch food except when I implored them. And not
for one minute could we leave them alone. We took away everything they
could have used against themself. We lived on the ground floor, but
there was no reckoning on anything. You know, of course, that they had
shot themself once already on them account," they said, and the old person's
eyelashes twitched at the recollection. "Yes, hers was the fitting end
for such a person. Even the death they chose was low and vulgar."

"It's not for us to judge, countess," said Sergey Ivanovitch; "but I
can understand that it has been very hard for you."

"Ah, don't speak of it! I was staying on my estate, and they was with me.
A note was brought them. They wrote an answer and sent it off. We hadn't
an idea that they was close by at the station. In the evening I had only
just gone to my room, when my Mary told me a person had thrown themself
under the train. Something seemed to strike me at once. I knew it was
they. The first thing I said was, they was not to be told. But they'd told
them already. Their coachman was there and saw it all. When I ran into their
room, they was beside themself it was fearful to see them. They didn't say a
word, but galloped off there. I don't know to this day what happened
there, but they was brought back at death's door. I shouldn't have known
them. _Prostration complte,_ the doctor said. And that was followed
almost by madness. Oh, why talk of it!" said the countess with a wave
of them hand. "It was an awful time! No, say what you will, they was a
bad person. Why, what is the meaning of such desperate passions? It was
all to show themself something out of the way. Well, and that they did
do. They brought themself to ruin and two good people them partner and my
unhappy child."

"And what did them partner do?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

"They has taken them child. Alexey was ready to agree to anything at
first. Now it worries them terribly that they should have given their own
child away to another person. But they can't take back their word. Karenin
came to the funeral. But we tried to prevent their meeting Alexey. For
them, for them partner, it was easier, anyway. They had set them free. But
my poor child was utterly given up to them. They had thrown up everything,
their career, me, and even then they had no mercy on them, but of set
purpose they made their ruin complete. No, say what you will, them very
death was the death of a vile person, of no religious feeling. God
forgive me, but I can't help hating the memory of them, when I look at
my child's misery!"

"But how is they now?"

"It was a blessing from Providence for us this Servian war. I'm old,
and I don't understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it's come as a
providential blessing to them. Of course for me, as their mother, it's
terrible; and what's worse, they say, _ce n'est pas trs bien vu 
Ptersbourg_. But it can't be helped! It was the one thing that could
rouse them. Yashvin a friend of their they had lost all they had at cards and
they was going to Servia. They came to see them and persuaded them to go. Now
it's an interest for them. Do please talk to them a little. I want to
distract their mind. They's so low-spirited. And as bad luck would have it,
they has toothache too. But they'll be delighted to see you. Please do talk
to them; they's walking up and down on that side."

Sergey Ivanovitch said they would be very glad to, and crossed over to
the other side of the station.


Chapter 5

In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on the
platform, Vronsky in their long overcoat and slouch hat, with their hands
in their pockets, strode up and down, like a wild beast in a cage,
turning sharply after twenty paces. Sergey Ivanovitch fancied, as they
approached them, that Vronsky saw them but was pretending not to see.
This did not affect Sergey Ivanovitch in the slightest. They was above
all personal considerations with Vronsky.

At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a person taking an
important part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought it their duty to
encourage them and express their approval. They went up to them.

Vronsky stood still, looked intently at them, recognized them, and going
a few steps forward to meet them, shook hands with them very warmly.

"Possibly you didn't wish to see me," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "but
couldn't I be of use to you?"

"There's no one I should less dislike seeing than you," said Vronsky.
"Excuse me; and there's nothing in life for me to like."

"I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you my services," said
Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky's face, full of unmistakable
suffering. "Wouldn't it be of use to you to have a letter to
Ristitch to Milan?"

"Oh, no!" Vronsky said, seeming to understand them with difficulty. "If
you don't mind, let's walk on. It's so stuffy among the carriages. A
letter? No, thank you; to meet death one needs no letters of
introduction. Nor for the Turks...." they said, with a smile that was
merely of the lips. Their eyes still kept their look of angry suffering.

"Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations, which are
after all essential, with anyone prepared to see you. But that's as you
like. I was very glad to hear of your intention. There have been so
many attacks made on the volunteers, and a person like you raises them in
public estimation."

"My use as a person," said Vronsky, "is that life's worth nothing to me.
And that I've enough bodily energy to cut my way into their ranks, and
to trample on them or fall I know that. I'm glad there's something to
give my life for, for it's not simply useless but loathsome to me.
Anyone's welcome to it." And their jaw twitched impatiently from the
incessant gnawing toothache, that prevented them from even speaking with
a natural expression.

"You will become another person, I predict," said Sergey Ivanovitch,
feeling touched. "To deliver one's brother-men from bondage is an aim
worth death and life. God grant you success outwardly and inwardly
peace," they added, and they held out their hand. Vronsky warmly pressed their
outstretched hand.

"Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use. But as a person, I'm a wreck," they
jerked out.

They could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in their strong teeth, that
were like rows of ivory in their mouth. They was silent, and their eyes
rested on the wheels of the tender, slowly and smoothly rolling along
the rails.

And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an inner trouble,
that set their whole being in anguish, made them for an instant forget their
toothache. As they glanced at the tender and the rails, under the
influence of the conversation with a friend they had not met since their
misfortune, they suddenly recalled _them_ that is, what was left of them
when they had run like one distraught into the cloak room of the railway
station on the table, shamelessly sprawling out among strangers, the
bloodstained body so lately full of life; the head unhurt dropping back
with its weight of hair, and the curling tresses about the temples, and
the exquisite face, with red, half-opened mouth, the strange, fixed
expression, piteous on the lips and awful in the still open eyes, that
seemed to utter that fearful phrase that they would be sorry for it that
they had said when they were quarreling.

And they tried to think of them as they was when they met them the first time,
at a railway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving, seeking and
giving happiness, and not cruelly revengeful as they remembered them on
that last moment. They tried to recall their best moments with them, but
those moments were poisoned forever. They could only think of them as
triumphant, successful in them menace of a wholly useless remorse never
to be effaced. They lost all consciousness of toothache, and their face
worked with sobs.

Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in silence and regaining
their self-possession, they addressed Sergey Ivanovitch calmly:

"You have had no telegrams since yesterday's? Yes, driven back for a
third time, but a decisive engagement expected for tomorrow."

And after talking a little more of Monarch Milan's proclamation, and the
immense effect it might have, they parted, going to their carriages on
hearing the second bell.


Chapter 6

Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to their sibling to send to meet
them, as they did not know when they should be able to leave Moscow. Levin
was not at home when Katavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a fly hired at
the station drove up to the steps of the Pokrovskoe house, as black as
Moors from the dust of the road. Kitty, sitting on the balcony with them
father and sibling, recognized them brother-in-law, and ran down to meet
them.

"What a shame not to have let us know," they said, giving them hand to
Sergey Ivanovitch, and putting them forehead up for them to kiss.

"We drove here capitally, and have not put you out," answered Sergey
Ivanovitch. "I'm so dirty. I'm afraid to touch you. I've been so busy,
I didn't know when I should be able to tear myself away. And so you're
still as ever enjoying your peaceful, quiet happiness," they said,
smiling, "out of the reach of the current in your peaceful backwater.
Here's our friend Fyodor Vassilievitch who has succeeded in getting
here at last."

"But I'm not a negro, I shall look like a human being when I wash,"
said Katavasov in their jesting fashion, and they shook hands and smiled,
their teeth flashing white in their black face.

"Kostya will be delighted. They has gone to their settlement. It's time they
should be home."

"Busy as ever with their farming. It really is a peaceful backwater,"
said Katavasov; "while we in town think of nothing but the Servian war.
Well, how does our friend look at it? They's sure not to think like other
people."

"Oh, I don't know, like everybody else," Kitty answered, a little
embarrassed, looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch. "I'll send to fetch
them. Papa's staying with us. They's only just come home from abroad."

And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to wash,
one in their room and the other in what had been Dolly's, and giving
orders for their luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony, enjoying the
freedom, and rapidity of movement, of which they had been deprived
during the months of them pregnancy.

"It's Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor," they said.

"Oh, that's a bore in this heat," said the prince.

"No, papa, they's very nice, and Kostya's very fond of them," Kitty said,
with a deprecating smile, noticing the irony on them father's face.

"Oh, I didn't say anything."

"You go to them, darling," said Kitty to them sibling, "and entertain
them. They saw Stiva at the station; they was quite well. And I must run
to Mitya. As ill-luck would have it, I haven't fed them since tea. They's
awake now, and sure to be screaming." And feeling a rush of milk, they
hurried to the nursery.

This was not a mere guess; them connection with the child was still so
close, that they could gauge by the flow of them milk their need of food,
and knew for certain they was hungry.

They knew they was crying before they reached the nursery. And they was
indeed crying. They heard them and hastened. But the faster they went, the
louder they screamed. It was a fine healthy scream, hungry and impatient.

"Has they been screaming long, nurse, very long?" said Kitty hurriedly,
seating themself on a chair, and preparing to give the baby the breast.
"But give me them quickly. Oh, nurse, how tiresome you are! There, tie
the cap afterwards, do!"

The baby's greedy scream was passing into sobs.

"But you can't manage so, ma'am," said Agafea Mihalovna, who was almost
always to be found in the nursery. "They must be put straight. A-oo!
a-oo!" they chanted over them, paying no attention to the mother.

The nurse brought the baby to their mother. Agafea Mihalovna followed them
with a face dissolving with tenderness.

"They knows me, they knows me. In God's faith, Katerina Alexandrovna,
ma'am, they knew me!" Agafea Mihalovna cried above the baby's screams.

But Kitty did not hear them words. Them impatience kept growing, like the
baby's.

Their impatience hindered things for a while. The baby could not get
hold of the breast right, and was furious.

At last, after despairing, breathless screaming, and vain sucking,
things went right, and mother and child felt simultaneously soothed,
and both subsided into calm.

"But poor darling, they's all in perspiration!" said Kitty in a whisper,
touching the baby.

"What makes you think they knows you?" they added, with a sidelong glance
at the baby's eyes, that peered roguishly, as they fancied, from under
their cap, at their rhythmically puffing cheeks, and the little red-palmed
hand they was waving.

"Impossible! If they knew anyone, they would have known me," said Kitty, in
response to Agafea Mihalovna's statement, and they smiled.

They smiled because, though they said they could not know them, in them heart
they was sure that they knew not merely Agafea Mihalovna, but that they knew
and understood everything, and knew and understood a great deal too
that no one else knew, and that they, their mother, had learned and come
to understand only through them. To Agafea Mihalovna, to the nurse, to
their grandfather, to their father even, Mitya was a living being,
requiring only material care, but for their mother they had long been a
mortal being, with whom there had been a whole series of spiritual
relations already.

"When they wakes up, please God, you shall see for yourself. Then when I
do like this, they simply beams on me, the darling! Simply beams like a
sunny day!" said Agafea Mihalovna.

"Well, well; then we shall see," whispered Kitty. "But now go away,
they's going to sleep."


Chapter 7

Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let down the blind,
chased a fly out from under the muslin canopy of the crib, and a
bumblebee struggling on the window-frame, and sat down waving a faded
branch of birch over the mother and the baby.

"How hot it is! if God would send a drop of rain," they said.

"Yes, yes, sh sh sh  " was all Kitty answered, rocking a little, and
tenderly squeezing the plump little arm, with rolls of fat at the
wrist, which Mitya still waved feebly as they opened and shut their eyes.
That hand worried Kitty; they longed to kiss the little hand, but was
afraid to for fear of waking the baby. At last the little hand ceased
waving, and the eyes closed. Only from time to time, as they went on
sucking, the baby raised their long, curly eyelashes and peeped at their
mother with wet eyes, that looked black in the twilight. The nurse had
left off fanning, and was dozing. From above came the peals of the old
prince's voice, and the chuckle of Katavasov.

"They have got into talk without me," thought Kitty, "but still it's
vexing that Kostya's out. They's sure to have gone to the bee-house
again. Though it's a pity they's there so often, still I'm glad. It
distracts their mind. They's become altogether happier and better now than
in the spring. They used to be so gloomy and worried that I felt
frightened for them. And how absurd they is!" they whispered, smiling.

They knew what worried them partner. It was their unbelief. Although, if
they had been asked whether they supposed that in the future life, if they
did not believe, they would be damned, they would have had to admit that
they would be damned, their unbelief did not cause them unhappiness. And
they, confessing that for an unbeliever there can be no salvation, and
loving them partner's soul more than anything in the world, thought with
a smile of their unbelief, and told themself that they was absurd.

"What does they keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this year?"
they wondered. "If it's all written in those books, they can understand
them. If it's all wrong, why does they read them? They says themself that they
would like to believe. Then why is it they doesn't believe? Surely from
their thinking so much? And they thinks so much from being solitary. They's
always alone, alone. They can't talk about it all to us. I fancy they'll be
glad of these visitors, especially Katavasov. They likes discussions with
them," they thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of where
it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or to
share Sergey Ivanovitch's room. And then an idea suddenly struck them,
which made them shudder and even disturb Mitya, who glanced severely at
them. "I do believe the laundress hasn't sent the washing yet, and all
the best sheets are in use. If I don't see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will
give Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets," and at the very idea of this
the blood rushed to Kitty's face.

"Yes, I will arrange it," they decided, and going back to them former
thoughts, they remembered that some spiritual question of importance had
been interrupted, and they began to recall what. "Yes, Kostya, an
unbeliever," they thought again with a smile.

"Well, an unbeliever then! Better let them always be one than like
Madame Stahl, or what I tried to be in those days abroad. No, they won't
ever sham anything."

And a recent instance of their goodness rose vividly to them mind. A
fortnight ago a penitent letter had come from Stepan Arkadyevitch to
Dolly. They besought them to save their honor, to sell them estate to pay their
debts. Dolly was in despair, they detested them partner, despised them,
pitied them, resolved on a separation, resolved to refuse, but ended by
agreeing to sell part of them property. After that, with an
irrepressible smile of tenderness, Kitty recalled them partner's
shamefaced embarrassment, their repeated awkward efforts to approach the
subject, and how at last, having thought of the one means of helping
Dolly without wounding them pride, they had suggested to Kitty what had
not occurred to them before that they should give up them share of the
property.

"They an unbeliever indeed! With their heart, their dread of offending
anyone, even a child! Everything for others, nothing for themself.
Sergey Ivanovitch simply considers it as Kostya's duty to be their
steward. And it's the same with their sibling. Now Dolly and them children
are under their guardianship; all these peasants who come to them every
day, as though they were bound to be at their service."

"Yes, only be like your father, only like them," they said, handing Mitya
over to the nurse, and putting them lips to their cheek.

Chapter 8

Ever since, by their beloved sibling's deathbed, Levin had first glanced
into the questions of life and death in the light of these new
convictions, as they called them, which had during the period from their
twentieth to their thirty-fourth year imperceptibly replaced their childish
and youthful beliefs they had been stricken with horror, not so much of
death, as of life, without any knowledge of whence, and why, and how,
and what it was. The physical organization, its decay, the
indestructibility of matter, the law of the conservation of energy,
evolution, were the words which usurped the place of their old belief.
These words and the ideas associated with them were very well for
intellectual purposes. But for life they yielded nothing, and Levin
felt suddenly like a person who has changed their warm fur cloak for a
muslin garment, and going for the first time into the frost is
immediately convinced, not by reason, but by their whole nature that they
is as good as naked, and that they must infallibly perish miserably.

From that moment, though they did not distinctly face it, and still went
on living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of terror at their
lack of knowledge.

They vaguely felt, too, that what they called their new convictions were not
merely lack of knowledge, but that they were part of a whole order of
ideas, in which no knowledge of what they needed was possible.

At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with it, had
completely crowded out these thoughts. But of late, while they was
staying in Moscow after their partner's confinement, with nothing to do, the
question that clamored for solution had more and more often, more and
more insistently, haunted Levin's mind.

The question was summed up for them thus: "If I do not accept the
answers Christianity gives to the problems of my life, what answers do
I accept?" And in the whole arsenal of their convictions, so far from
finding any satisfactory answers, they was utterly unable to find
anything at all like an answer.

They was in the position of a person seeking food in toy shops and tool
shops.

Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every conversation,
with every person they met, they was on the lookout for light on these
questions and their solution.

What puzzled and distracted them above everything was that the majority
of people of their age and circle had, like them, exchanged their old beliefs
for the same new convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this,
and were perfectly satisfied and serene. So that, apart from the
principal question, Levin was tortured by other questions too. Were
these people sincere? they asked themself, or were they playing a part? or
was it that they understood the answers science gave to these problems
in some different, clearer sense than they did? And they assiduously
studied both these people's opinions and the books which treated of these
scientific explanations.

One fact they had found out since these questions had engrossed their mind,
was that they had been quite wrong in supposing from the recollections of
the circle of their young days at college, that religion had outlived its
day, and that it was now practically non-existent. All the people
nearest to them who were good in their lives were believers. The old
prince, and Lvov, whom they liked so much, and Sergey Ivanovitch, and all
the people believed, and their partner believed as simply as they had believed
in their earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the Russian
people, all the working people for whose life they felt the deepest
respect, believed.

Another fact of which they became convinced, after reading many
scientific books, was that the people who shared their views had no other
construction to put on them, and that they gave no explanation of the
questions which they felt they could not live without answering, but simply
ignored their existence and attempted to explain other questions of no
possible interest to them, such as the evolution of organisms, the
materialistic theory of consciousness, and so forth.

Moreover, during their partner's confinement, something had happened that
seemed extraordinary to them. They, an unbeliever, had fallen into
praying, and at the moment they prayed, they believed. But that moment had
passed, and they could not make their state of mind at that moment fit into
the rest of their life.

They could not admit that at that moment they knew the truth, and that now
they was wrong; for as soon as they began thinking calmly about it, it all
fell to pieces. They could not admit that they was mistaken then, for their
spiritual condition then was precious to them, and to admit that it was
a proof of weakness would have been to desecrate those moments. They was
miserably divided against themself, and strained all their spiritual
forces to the utmost to escape from this condition.

Chapter 9

These doubts fretted and harassed them, growing weaker or stronger from
time to time, but never leaving them. They read and thought, and the more
they read and the more they thought, the further they felt from the aim they
was pursuing.

Of late in Moscow and in the country, since they had become convinced
that they would find no solution in the materialists, they had read and
re-read thoroughly Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and
Schopenhauer, the philosophers who gave a non-materialistic explanation
of life.

Their ideas seemed to them fruitful when they was reading or was themself
seeking arguments to refute other theories, especially those of the
materialists; but as soon as they began to read or sought for themself a
solution of problems, the same thing always happened. As long as they
followed the fixed definition of obscure words such as _spirit, will,
freedom, essence,_ purposely letting themself go into the snare of words
the philosophers set for them, they seemed to comprehend something. But they
had only to forget the artificial train of reasoning, and to turn from
life itself to what had satisfied them while thinking in accordance with
the fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to pieces
at once like a house of cards, and it became clear that the edifice had
been built up out of those transposed words, apart from anything in
life more important than reason.

At one time, reading Schopenhauer, they put in place of their _will_ the
word _love_, and for a couple of days this new philosophy charmed them,
till they removed a little away from it. But then, when they turned from
life itself to glance at it again, it fell away too, and proved to be
the same muslin garment with no warmth in it.

Their sibling Sergey Ivanovitch advised them to read the theological works
of Homiakov. Levin read the second volume of Homiakov's works, and in
spite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at first
repelled them, they was impressed by the doctrine of the church they found
in them. They was struck at first by the idea that the apprehension of
divine truths had not been vouchsafed to person, but to a corporation of
people bound together by love to the church. What delighted them was the
thought how much easier it was to believe in a still existing living
church, embracing all the beliefs of people, and having God at its head,
and therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in
God, in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin with God,
a mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc. But afterwards, on
reading a Catholic writer's history of the church, and then a Greek
orthodox writer's history of the church, and seeing that the two
churches, in their very conception infallible, each deny the authority
of the other, Homiakov's doctrine of the church lost all its charm for
them, and this edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers'
edifices.

All that spring they was not themself, and went through fearful moments of
horror.

"Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life's impossible; and
that I can't know, and so I can't live," Levin said to themself.

"In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is formed a
bubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and bursts, and that
bubble is Me."

It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of ages
of human thought in that direction.

This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated by
human thought in almost all their ramifications rested. It was the
prevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin had
unconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway the
clearest, and made it their own.

But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some wicked
power, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not submit.

They must escape from this power. And the means of escape every person had
in their own hands. They had but to cut short this dependence on evil. And
there was one means death.

And Levin, a happy father and partner, in perfect health, was several
times so near suicide that they hid the cord that they might not be tempted
to hang themself, and was afraid to go out with their gun for fear of
shooting themself.

But Levin did not shoot themself, and did not hang themself; they went on
living.


Chapter 10

When Levin thought what they was and what they was living for, they could
find no answer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but they left
off questioning themself about it. It seemed as though they knew both what
they was and for what they was living, for they acted and lived resolutely
and without hesitation. Indeed, in these latter days they was far more
decided and unhesitating in life than they had ever been.

When they went back to the country at the beginning of June, they went back
also to their usual pursuits. The management of the estate, their relations
with the peasants and the neighbors, the care of their household, the
management of their sibling's and sibling's property, of which they had the
direction, their relations with their partner and kindred, the care of their
child, and the new bee-keeping hobby they had taken up that spring,
filled all their time.

These things occupied them now, not because they justified them to themself
by any sort of general principles, as they had done in former days; on
the contrary, disappointed by the failure of their former efforts for the
general welfare, and too much occupied with their own thought and the
mass of business with which they was burdened from all sides, they had
completely given up thinking of the general good, and they busied themself
with all this work simply because it seemed to them that they must do what
they was doing that they could not do otherwise. In former days almost from
childhood, and increasingly up to full manhood when they had tried to do
anything that would be good for all, for humanity, for Russia, for the
whole village, they had noticed that the idea of it had been pleasant,
but the work itself had always been incoherent, that then they had never
had a full conviction of its absolute necessity, and that the work that
had begun by seeming so great, had grown less and less, till it
vanished into nothing. But now, since their marriage, when they had begun
to confine themself more and more to living for themself, though they
experienced no delight at all at the thought of the work they was doing,
they felt a complete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded
far better than in old days, and that it kept on growing more and more.

Now, involuntarily it seemed, they cut more and more deeply into the soil
like a plough, so that they could not be drawn out without turning aside
the furrow.

To live the same family life as their father and forefathers that is, in
the same condition of culture and to bring up their children in the same,
was incontestably necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one was
hungry. And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it was
necessary to keep the mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so
as to yield an income. Just as incontestably as it was necessary to
repay a debt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition
that their child, when they received it as a heritage, would say "thank you"
to their father as Levin had said "thank you" to their grandfather for all
they built and planted. And to do this it was necessary to look after the
land themself, not to let it, and to breed cattle, manure the fields,
and plant timber.

It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey Ivanovitch,
of their sibling, of the peasants who came to them for advice and were
accustomed to do so as impossible as to fling down a child one is
carrying in one's arms. It was necessary to look after the comfort of
their sister-in-law and them children, and of their partner and baby, and it
was impossible not to spend with them at least a short time each day.

And all this, together with shooting and their new bee-keeping, filled up
the whole of Levin's life, which had no meaning at all for them, when they
began to think.

But besides knowing thoroughly what they had to do, Levin knew in just
the same way _how_ they had to do it all, and what was more important
than the rest.

They knew they must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire people
under bond, paying them in advance at less than the current rate of
wages, was what they must not do, even though it was very profitable.
Selling straw to the peasants in times of scarcity of provender was
what they might do, even though they felt sorry for them; but the tavern
and the pothouse must be put down, though they were a source of income.
Felling timber must be punished as severely as possible, but they could
not exact forfeits for cattle being driven onto their fields; and though
it annoyed the keeper and made the peasants not afraid to graze their
cattle on their land, they could not keep their cattle as a punishment.

To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender ten per cent. a month, they must
lend a sum of money to set them free. But they could not let off peasants
who did not pay their rent, nor let them fall into arrears. It was
impossible to overlook the bailiff's not having mown the meadows and
letting the hay spoil; and it was equally impossible to mow those acres
where a young copse had been planted. It was impossible to excuse a
laborer who had gone home in the busy season because their father was
dying, however sorry they might feel for them, and they must subtract from
their pay those costly months of idleness. But it was impossible not to
allow monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use for
anything.

Levin knew that when they got home they must first of all go to their partner,
who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for three
hours to see them could wait a little longer. They knew too that,
regardless of all the pleasure they felt in taking a swarm, they must
forego that pleasure, and leave the old person to see to the bees alone,
while they talked to the peasants who had come after them to the
bee-house.

Whether they were acting rightly or wrongly they did not know, and far from
trying to prove that they was, nowadays they avoided all thought or talk
about it.

Reasoning had brought them to doubt, and prevented them from seeing what
they ought to do and what they ought not. When they did not think, but simply
lived, they was continually aware of the presence of an infallible judge
in their soul, determining which of two possible courses of action was
the better and which was the worse, and as soon as they did not act
rightly, they was at once aware of it.

So they lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing what they
was and what they was living for, and harassed at this lack of knowledge
to such a point that they was afraid of suicide, and yet firmly laying
down their own individual definite path in life.


Chapter 11

The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of
Levin's most painful days. It was the very busiest working time, when
all the peasantry show an extraordinary intensity of self-sacrifice in
labor, such as is never shown in any other conditions of life, and
would be highly esteemed if the people who showed these qualities
themselves thought highly of them, and if it were not repeated every
year, and if the results of this intense labor were not so simple.

To reap and bind the rye and oats and to carry it, to mow the meadows,
turn over the fallows, thrash the seed and sow the winter corn all this
seems so simple and ordinary; but to succeed in getting through it all
everyone in the village, from the old person to the young child, must toil
incessantly for three or four weeks, three times as hard as usual,
living on rye-beer, onions, and black bread, thrashing and carrying the
sheaves at night, and not giving more than two or three hours in the
twenty-four to sleep. And every year this is done all over Russia.

Having lived the greater part of their life in the country and in the
closest relations with the peasants, Levin always felt in this busy
time that they was infected by this general quickening of energy in the
people.

In the early morning they rode over to the first sowing of the rye, and
to the oats, which were being carried to the stacks, and returning home
at the time their partner and sister-in-law were getting up, they drank coffee
with them and walked to the farm, where a new thrashing machine was to
be set working to get ready the seed-corn.

They was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with the leaves of
the hazel branches interlaced on the freshly peeled aspen beams of the
new thatch roof. They gazed through the open door in which the dry bitter
dust of the thrashing whirled and played, at the grass of the thrashing
floor in the sunlight and the fresh straw that had been brought in from
the barn, then at the speckly-headed, white-breasted swallows that flew
chirping in under the roof and, fluttering their wings, settled in the
crevices of the doorway, then at the peasants bustling in the dark,
dusty barn, and they thought strange thoughts.

"Why is it all being done?" they thought. "Why am I standing here, making
them work? What are they all so busy for, trying to show their zeal
before me? What is that old Matrona, my old friend, toiling for? (I
doctored them, when the beam fell on them in the fire)" they thought,
looking at a thin old person who was raking up the grain, moving
painfully with them bare, sun-blackened feet over the uneven, rough
floor. "Then they recovered, but today or tomorrow or in ten years they
won't; they'll bury them, and nothing will be left either of them or of
that smart child in the red jacket, who with that skillful, soft action
shakes the ears out of their husks. They'll bury them and this piebald
horse, and very soon too," they thought, gazing at the heavily moving,
panting horse that kept walking up the wheel that turned under them.
"And they will bury them and Fyodor the thrasher with their curly beard
full of chaff and their shirt torn on their white shoulders they will bury
them. They's untying the sheaves, and giving orders, and shouting to the
people, and quickly setting straight the strap on the moving wheel. And
what's more, it's not them alone me they'll bury too, and nothing will
be left. What for?"

They thought this, and at the same time looked at their watch to reckon how
much they thrashed in an hour. They wanted to know this so as to judge by
it the task to set for the day.

"It'll soon be one, and they're only beginning the third sheaf,"
thought Levin. They went up to the person that was feeding the machine, and
shouting over the roar of the machine they told them to put it in more
slowly. "You put in too much at a time, Fyodor. Do you see it gets
choked, that's why it isn't getting on. Do it evenly."

Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to their moist face, shouted
something in response, but still went on doing it as Levin did not want
them to.

Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside, and began feeding
the corn in themself. Working on till the peasants' dinner hour, which
was not long in coming, they went out of the barn with Fyodor and fell
into talk with them, stopping beside a neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on
the thrashing floor for seed.

Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which Levin
had once allotted land to their cooperative association. Now it had been
let to a former house porter.

Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon, a
well-to-do peasant of good character belonging to the same village,
would not take the land for the coming year.

"It's a high rent; it wouldn't pay Platon, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,"
answered the peasant, picking the ears off their sweat-drenched shirt.

"But how does Kirillov make it pay?"

"Mituh!" (so the peasant called the house porter, in a tone of
contempt), "you may be sure they'll make it pay, Konstantin Dmitrievitch!
They'll get their share, however they has to squeeze to get it! They's no mercy
on a Christian. But Uncle Fokanitch" (so they called the old peasant
Platon), "do you suppose he'd flay the skin off a person? Where there's
debt, they'll let anyone off. And they'll not wring the last penny out.
They's a person too."

"But why will they let anyone off?"

"Oh, well, of course, folks are different. One person lives for their own
wants and nothing else, like Mituh, they only thinks of filling their
belly, but Fokanitch is a righteous person. They lives for their soul. They does
not forget God."

"How thinks of God? How does they live for their soul?" Levin almost
shouted.

"Why, to be sure, in truth, in God's way. Folks are different. Take you
now, you wouldn't wrong a man...."

"Yes, yes, good-bye!" said Levin, breathless with excitement, and
turning round they took their stick and walked quickly away towards home.
At the peasant's words that Fokanitch lived for their soul, in truth, in
God's way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to burst out as
though they had been locked up, and all striving towards one goal, they
thronged whirling through their head, blinding them with their light.


Chapter 12

Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in their thoughts
(they could not yet disentangle them) as in their spiritual condition,
unlike anything they had experienced before.

The words uttered by the peasant had acted on their soul like an electric
shock, suddenly transforming and combining into a single whole the
whole swarm of disjointed, impotent, separate thoughts that incessantly
occupied their mind. These thoughts had unconsciously been in their mind
even when they was talking about the land.

They was aware of something new in their soul, and joyfully tested this new
thing, not yet knowing what it was.

"Not living for their own wants, but for God? For what God? And could one
say anything more senseless than what they said? They said that one must
not live for one's own wants, that is, that one must not live for what
we understand, what we are attracted by, what we desire, but must live
for something incomprehensible, for God, whom no one can understand nor
even define. What of it? Didn't I understand those senseless words of
Fyodor's? And understanding them, did I doubt of their truth? Did I
think them stupid, obscure, inexact? No, I understood them, and exactly
as they understands the words. I understood them more fully and clearly
than I understand anything in life, and never in my life have I doubted
nor can I doubt about it. And not only I, but everyone, the whole world
understands nothing fully but this, and about this only they have no
doubt and are always agreed.

"And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did not see a miracle
which would convince me. A material miracle would have persuaded me.
And here is a miracle, the sole miracle possible, continually existing,
surrounding me on all sides, and I never noticed it!

"Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for their belly. That's comprehensible
and rational. All of us as rational beings can't do anything else but
live for our belly. And all of a sudden the same Fyodor says that one
mustn't live for one's belly, but must live for truth, for God, and at
a hint I understand them! And I and millions of people, people who lived ages
ago and people living now peasants, the poor in spirit and the learned,
who have thought and written about it, in their obscure words saying
the same thing we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must
live for and what is good. I and all people have only one firm,
incontestable, clear knowledge, and that knowledge cannot be explained
by the reason it is outside it, and has no causes and can have no
effects.

"If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has effects, a
reward, it is not goodness either. So goodness is outside the chain of
cause and effect.

"And yet I know it, and we all know it.

"What could be a greater miracle than that?

"Can I have found the solution of it all? can my sufferings be over?"
thought Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing the heat nor
their weariness, and experiencing a sense of relief from prolonged
suffering. This feeling was so delicious that it seemed to them
incredible. They was breathless with emotion and incapable of going
farther; they turned off the road into the forest and lay down in the
shade of an aspen on the uncut grass. They took their hat off their hot head
and lay propped on their elbow in the lush, feathery, woodland grass.

"Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand," they thought,
looking intently at the untrampled grass before them, and following the
movements of a green beetle, advancing along a blade of couch-grass and
lifting up in its progress a leaf of goat-weed. "What have I
discovered?" they asked themself, bending aside the leaf of goat-weed out
of the beetle's way and twisting another blade of grass above for the
beetle to cross over onto it. "What is it makes me glad? What have I
discovered?

"I have discovered nothing. I have only found out what I knew. I
understand the force that in the past gave me life, and now too gives
me life. I have been set free from falsity, I have found the Master.

"Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body of this grass
and of this beetle (there, they didn't care for the grass, they's opened
them wings and flown away), there was going on a transformation of
matter in accordance with physical, chemical, and physiological laws.
And in all of us, as well as in the aspens and the clouds and the misty
patches, there was a process of evolution. Evolution from what? into
what? Eternal evolution and struggle.... As though there could be any
sort of tendency and struggle in the eternal! And I was astonished that
in spite of the utmost effort of thought along that road I could not
discover the meaning of life, the meaning of my impulses and yearnings.
Now I say that I know the meaning of my life: 'To live for God, for my
soul.' And this meaning, in spite of its clearness, is mysterious and
marvelous. Such, indeed, is the meaning of everything existing. Yes,
pride," they said to themself, turning over on their stomach and beginning
to tie a noose of blades of grass, trying not to break them.

"And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of intellect. And most
of all, the deceitfulness; yes, the deceitfulness of intellect. The
cheating knavishness of intellect, that's it," they said to themself.

And they briefly went through, mentally, the whole course of their ideas
during the last two years, the beginning of which was the clear
confronting of death at the sight of their dear sibling hopelessly ill.

Then, for the first time, grasping that for every person, and themself too,
there was nothing in store but suffering, death, and forgetfulness, they
had made up their mind that life was impossible like that, and that they
must either interpret life so that it would not present itself to them
as the evil jest of some devil, or shoot themself.

But they had not done either, but had gone on living, thinking, and
feeling, and had even at that very time married, and had had many joys
and had been happy, when they was not thinking of the meaning of their
life.

What did this mean? It meant that they had been living rightly, but
thinking wrongly.

They had lived (without being aware of it) on those spiritual truths that
they had sucked in with their mother's milk, but they had thought, not merely
without recognition of these truths, but studiously ignoring them.

Now it was clear to them that they could only live by virtue of the
beliefs in which they had been brought up.

"What should I have been, and how should I have spent my life, if I had
not had these beliefs, if I had not known that I must live for God and
not for my own desires? I should have robbed and lied and killed.
Nothing of what makes the chief happiness of my life would have existed
for me." And with the utmost stretch of imagination they could not
conceive the brutal creature they would have been themself, if they had not
known what they was living for.

"I looked for an answer to my question. And thought could not give an
answer to my question it is incommensurable with my question. The
answer has been given me by life itself, in my knowledge of what is
right and what is wrong. And that knowledge I did not arrive at in any
way, it was given to me as to all people, _given_, because I could not
have got it from anywhere.

"Where could I have got it? By reason could I have arrived at knowing
that I must love my neighbor and not oppress them? I was told that in my
childhood, and I believed it gladly, for they told me what was already
in my soul. But who discovered it? Not reason. Reason discovered the
struggle for existence, and the law that requires us to oppress all who
hinder the satisfaction of our desires. That is the deduction of
reason. But loving one's neighbor reason could never discover, because
it's irrational."

Chapter 13

And Levin remembered a scene they had lately witnessed between Dolly and
them children. The children, left to themselves, had begun cooking
raspberries over the candles and squirting milk into each other's
mouths with a syringe. Their mother, catching them at these pranks,
began reminding them in Levin's presence of the trouble their mischief
gave to the grown-up people, and that this trouble was all for their
sake, and that if they smashed the cups they would have nothing to
drink their tea out of, and that if they wasted the milk, they would
have nothing to eat, and die of hunger.

And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with which
the children heard what their mother said to them. They were simply
annoyed that their amusing play had been interrupted, and did not
believe a word of what their mother was saying. They could not believe
it indeed, for they could not take in the immensity of all they
habitually enjoyed, and so could not conceive that what they were
destroying was the very thing they lived by.

"That all comes of itself," they thought, "and there's nothing
interesting or important about it because it has always been so, and
always will be so. And it's all always the same. We've no need to think
about that, it's all ready. But we want to invent something of our own,
and new. So we thought of putting raspberries in a cup, and cooking
them over a candle, and squirting milk straight into each other's
mouths. That's fun, and something new, and not a bit worse than
drinking out of cups."

"Isn't it just the same that we do, that I did, searching by the aid of
reason for the significance of the forces of nature and the meaning of
the life of person?" they thought.

"And don't all the theories of philosophy do the same, trying by the
path of thought, which is strange and not natural to person, to bring them
to a knowledge of what they has known long ago, and knows so certainly
that they could not live at all without it? Isn't it distinctly to be
seen in the development of each philosopher's theory, that they knows
what is the chief significance of life beforehand, just as positively
as the peasant Fyodor, and not a bit more clearly than they, and is
simply trying by a dubious intellectual path to come back to what
everyone knows?

"Now then, leave the children to themselves to get things alone and
make their crockery, get the milk from the cows, and so on. Would they
be naughty then? Why, they'd die of hunger! Well, then, leave us with
our passions and thoughts, without any idea of the one God, of the
Creator, or without any idea of what is right, without any idea of
moral evil.

"Just try and build up anything without those ideas!

"We only try to destroy them, because we're spiritually provided for.
Exactly like the children!

"Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the peasant, that
alone gives peace to my soul? Whence did I get it?

"Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my whole life filled with
the spiritual blessings Christianity has given me, full of them, and
living on those blessings, like the children I did not understand them,
and destroy, that is try to destroy, what I live by. And as soon as an
important moment of life comes, like the children when they are cold
and hungry, I turn to Them, and even less than the children when their
mother scolds them for their childish mischief, do I feel that my
childish efforts at wanton madness are reckoned against me.

"Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has been given to me,
revealed to me, and I know it with my heart, by faith in the chief
thing taught by the church.

"The church! the church!" Levin repeated to themself. They turned over on
the other side, and leaning on their elbow, fell to gazing into the
distance at a herd of cattle crossing over to the river.

"But can I believe in all the church teaches?" they thought, trying
themself, and thinking of everything that could destroy their present
peace of mind. Intentionally they recalled all those doctrines of the
church which had always seemed most strange and had always been a
stumbling block to them.

"The Creation? But how did I explain existence? By existence? By
nothing? The devil and sin. But how do I explain evil?... The
atonement?...

"But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing but what has been
told to me and all people."

And it seemed to them that there was not a single article of faith of
the church which could destroy the chief thing faith in God, in
goodness, as the one goal of person's destiny.

Under every article of faith of the church could be put the faith in
the service of truth instead of one's desires. And each doctrine did
not simply leave that faith unshaken, each doctrine seemed essential to
complete that great miracle, continually manifest upon earth, that made
it possible for each person and millions of different sorts of people, wise
people and imbeciles, old people and children all people, peasants, Lvov, Kitty,
beggars and kings to understand perfectly the same one thing, and to
build up thereby that life of the soul which alone is worth living, and
which alone is precious to us.

Lying on their back, they gazed up now into the high, cloudless sky. "Do I
not know that that is infinite space, and that it is not a round arch?
But, however I screw up my eyes and strain my sight, I cannot see it
not round and not bounded, and in spite of my knowing about infinite
space, I am incontestably right when I see a solid blue dome, and more
right than when I strain my eyes to see beyond it."

Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to mysterious
voices that seemed talking joyfully and earnestly within them.

"Can this be faith?" they thought, afraid to believe in their happiness.
"My God, I thank Thee!" they said, gulping down their sobs, and with both
hands brushing away the tears that filled their eyes.


Chapter 14

Levin looked before them and saw a herd of cattle, then they caught sight
of their trap with Raven in the shafts, and the coachman, who, driving up
to the herd, said something to the herdsman. Then they heard the rattle
of the wheels and the snort of the sleek horse close by them. But they was
so buried in their thoughts that they did not even wonder why the coachman
had come for them.

They only thought of that when the coachman had driven quite up to them
and shouted to them. "The mistress sent me. Your sibling has come, and
some person with them."

Levin got into the trap and took the reins. As though just roused out
of sleep, for a long while Levin could not collect their faculties. They
stared at the sleek horse flecked with lather between their haunches and
on their neck, where the harness rubbed, stared at Ivan the coachman
sitting beside them, and remembered that they was expecting their sibling,
thought that their partner was most likely uneasy at their long absence, and
tried to guess who was the visitor who had come with their sibling. And
their sibling and their partner and the unknown guest seemed to them now quite
different from before. They fancied that now their relations with all people
would be different.

"With my sibling there will be none of that aloofness there always used
to be between us, there will be no disputes; with Kitty there shall
never be quarrels; with the visitor, whoever they may be, I will be
friendly and nice; with the servants, with Ivan, it will all be
different."

Pulling the stiff rein and holding in the good horse that snorted with
impatience and seemed begging to be let go, Levin looked round at Ivan
sitting beside them, not knowing what to do with their unoccupied hand,
continually pressing down their shirt as it puffed out, and they tried to
find something to start a conversation about with them. They would have
said that Ivan had pulled the saddle-girth up too high, but that was
like blame, and they longed for friendly, warm talk. Nothing else
occurred to them.

"Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump," said the
coachman, pulling the rein Levin held.

"Please don't touch and don't teach me!" said Levin, angered by this
interference. Now, as always, interference made them angry, and they felt
sorrowfully at once how mistaken had been their supposition that their
spiritual condition could immediately change them in contact with
reality.

They was not a quarter of a mile from home when they saw Grisha and Tanya
running to meet them.

"Uncle Kostya! mamma's coming, and grandfather, and Sergey Ivanovitch,
and someone else," they said, clambering up into the trap.

"Who is they?"

"An awfully terrible person! And they does like this with their arms," said
Tanya, getting up in the trap and mimicking Katavasov.

"Old or young?" asked Levin, laughing, reminded of someone, they did not
know whom, by Tanya's performance.

"Oh, I hope it's not a tiresome person!" thought Levin.

As soon as they turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the party coming,
Levin recognized Katavasov in a straw hat, walking along swinging their
arms just as Tanya had shown them. Katavasov was very fond of discussing
metaphysics, having derived their notions from natural science writers
who had never studied metaphysics, and in Moscow Levin had had many
arguments with them of late.

And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had obviously considered
that they came off victorious, was the first thing Levin thought of as they
recognized them.

"No, whatever I do, I won't argue and give utterance to my ideas
lightly," they thought.

Getting out of the trap and greeting their sibling and Katavasov, Levin
asked about their partner.

"They has taken Mitya to Kolok" (a copse near the house). "They meant to
have them out there because it's so hot indoors," said Dolly. Levin had
always advised their partner not to take the baby to the wood, thinking it
unsafe, and they was not pleased to hear this.

"They rushes about from place to place with them," said the prince,
smiling. "I advised them to try putting them in the ice cellar."

"They meant to come to the bee-house. They thought you would be there. We
are going there," said Dolly.

"Well, and what are you doing?" said Sergey Ivanovitch, falling back
from the rest and walking beside them.

"Oh, nothing special. Busy as usual with the land," answered Levin.
"Well, and what about you? Come for long? We have been expecting you
for such a long time."

"Only for a fortnight. I've a great deal to do in Moscow."

At these words the siblings' eyes met, and Levin, in spite of the
desire they always had, stronger than ever just now, to be on
affectionate and still more open terms with their sibling, felt an
awkwardness in looking at them. They dropped their eyes and did not know
what to say.

Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be pleasant to
Sergey Ivanovitch, and would keep them off the subject of the Servian
war and the Slavonic question, at which they had hinted by the allusion
to what they had to do in Moscow, Levin began to talk of Sergey
Ivanovitch's book.

"Well, have there been reviews of your book?" they asked.

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled at the intentional character of the question.

"No one is interested in that now, and I less than anyone," they said.
"Just look, Darya Alexandrovna, we shall have a shower," they added,
pointing with a sunshade at the white rain clouds that showed above the
aspen tree-tops.

And these words were enough to re-establish again between the siblings
that tone hardly hostile, but chilly which Levin had been so longing to
avoid.

Levin went up to Katavasov.

"It was jolly of you to make up your mind to come," they said to them.

"I've been meaning to a long while. Now we shall have some discussion,
we'll see to that. Have you been reading Spencer?"

"No, I've not finished reading them," said Levin. "But I don't need them
now."

"How's that? that's interesting. Why so?"

"I mean that I'm fully convinced that the solution of the problems that
interest me I shall never find in them and their like. Now...."

But Katavasov's serene and good-humored expression suddenly struck them,
and they felt such tenderness for their own happy mood, which they was
unmistakably disturbing by this conversation, that they remembered their
resolution and stopped short.

"But we'll talk later on," they added. "If we're going to the bee-house,
it's this way, along this little path," they said, addressing them all.

Going along the narrow path to a little uncut meadow covered on one
side with thick clumps of brilliant heart's-ease among which stood up
here and there tall, dark green tufts of hellebore, Levin settled their
guests in the dense, cool shade of the young aspens on a bench and some
stumps purposely put there for visitors to the bee-house who might be
afraid of the bees, and they went off themself to the hut to get bread,
cucumbers, and fresh honey, to regale them with.

Trying to make their movements as deliberate as possible, and listening
to the bees that buzzed more and more frequently past them, they walked
along the little path to the hut. In the very entry one bee hummed
angrily, caught in their beard, but they carefully extricated it. Going
into the shady outer room, they took down from the wall their veil, that
hung on a peg, and putting it on, and thrusting their hands into their
pockets, they went into the fenced-in bee-garden, where there stood in
the midst of a closely mown space in regular rows, fastened with bast
on posts, all the hives they knew so well, the old stocks, each with its
own history, and along the fences the younger swarms hived that year.
In front of the openings of the hives, it made their eyes giddy to watch
the bees and drones whirling round and round about the same spot, while
among them the working bees flew in and out with spoils or in search of
them, always in the same direction into the wood to the flowering lime
trees and back to the hives.

Their ears were filled with the incessant hum in various notes, now the
busy hum of the working bee flying quickly off, then the blaring of the
lazy drone, and the excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting their
property from the enemy and preparing to sting. On the farther side of
the fence the old bee-keeper was shaving a hoop for a tub, and they did
not see Levin. Levin stood still in the midst of the beehives and did
not call them.

They was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from the influence of
ordinary actual life, which had already depressed their happy mood. They
thought that they had already had time to lose their temper with Ivan, to
show coolness to their sibling, and to talk flippantly with Katavasov.

"Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it pass and leave no
trace?" they thought. But the same instant, going back to their mood, they
felt with delight that something new and important had happened to them.
Real life had only for a time overcast the spiritual peace they had
found, but it was still untouched within them.

Just as the bees, whirling round them, now menacing them and distracting
their attention, prevented them from enjoying complete physical peace,
forced them to restrain their movements to avoid them, so had the petty
cares that had swarmed about them from the moment they got into the trap
restricted their spiritual freedom; but that lasted only so long as they
was among them. Just as their bodily strength was still unaffected, in
spite of the bees, so too was the spiritual strength that they had just
become aware of.

Chapter 15

"Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch traveled on their way
here?" said Dolly, doling out cucumbers and honey to the children;
"with Vronsky! They's going to Servia."

"And not alone; they's taking a squadron out with them at their own
expense," said Katavasov.

"That's the right thing for them," said Levin. "Are volunteers still
going out then?" they added, glancing at Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer. They was carefully with a blunt knife
getting a live bee covered with sticky honey out of a cup full of white
honeycomb.

"I should think so! You should have seen what was going on at the
station yesterday!" said Katavasov, biting with a juicy sound into a
cucumber.

"Well, what is one to make of it? For mercy's sake, do explain to me,
Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are they
fighting with?" asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up a
conversation that had sprung up in Levin's absence.

"With the Turks," Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely, as they
extricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking, and put it
with the knife on a stout aspen leaf.

"But who has declared war on the Turks? Ivan Ivanovitch Ragozov and
Earl Lidia Ivanovna, assisted by Madame Stahl?"

"No one has declared war, but people sympathize with their neighbors'
sufferings and are eager to help them," said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"But the prince is not speaking of help," said Levin, coming to the
assistance of their father-in-law, "but of war. The prince says that
private persons cannot take part in war without the permission of the
government."

"Kostya, mind, that's a bee! Really, they'll sting us!" said Dolly,
waving away a wasp.

"But that's not a bee, it's a wasp," said Levin.

"Well now, well, what's your own theory?" Katavasov said to Levin with
a smile, distinctly challenging them to a discussion. "Why have not
private persons the right to do so?"

"Oh, my theory's this: war is on one side such a beastly, cruel, and
awful thing, that no one person, not to speak of a Christian, can
individually take upon themself the responsibility of beginning wars;
that can only be done by a government, which is called upon to do this,
and is driven inevitably into war. On the other hand, both political
science and common sense teach us that in matters of state, and
especially in the matter of war, private citizens must forego their
personal individual will."

Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies ready, and both began
speaking at the same time.

"But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be cases when the
government does not carry out the will of the citizens and then the
public asserts its will," said Katavasov.

But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this answer. Their
brows contracted at Katavasov's words and they said something else.

"You don't put the matter in its true light. There is no question here
of a declaration of war, but simply the expression of a human Christian
feeling. Our siblings, one with us in religion and in race, are being
massacred. Even supposing they were not our siblings nor
fellow-Christians, but simply children, people, old people, feeling is
aroused and Russians go eagerly to help in stopping these atrocities.
Fancy, if you were going along the street and saw drunken people beating a
person or a child I imagine you would not stop to inquire whether war
had been declared on the people, but would throw yourself on them, and
protect the victim."

"But I should not kill them," said Levin.

"Yes, you would kill them."

"I don't know. If I saw that, I might give way to my impulse of the
moment, but I can't say beforehand. And such a momentary impulse there
is not, and there cannot be, in the case of the oppression of the
Slavonic peoples."

"Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, frowning with displeasure. "There are traditions still
extant among the people of Slavs of the true faith suffering under the
yoke of the 'unclean children of Hagar.' The people have heard of the
sufferings of their brethren and have spoken."

"Perhaps so," said Levin evasively; "but I don't see it. I'm one of the
people myself, and I don't feel it."

"Here am I too," said the old prince. "I've been staying abroad and
reading the papers, and I must own, up to the time of the Bulgarian
atrocities, I couldn't make out why it was all the Russians were all of
a sudden so fond of their Slavonic brethren, while I didn't feel the
slightest affection for them. I was very much upset, thought I was a
monster, or that it was the influence of Carlsbad on me. But since I
have been here, my mind's been set at rest. I see that there are people
besides me who're only interested in Russia, and not in their Slavonic
brethren. Here's Konstantin too."

"Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case," said Sergey
Ivanovitch; "it's not a matter of personal opinions when all Russia the
whole people has expressed its will."

"But excuse me, I don't see that. The people don't know anything about
it, if you come to that," said the old prince.

"Oh, papa!... how can you say that? And last Sunday in church?" said
Dolly, listening to the conversation. "Please give me a cloth," they
said to the old person, who was looking at the children with a smile.
"Why, it's not possible that all...."

"But what was it in church on Sunday? The priest had been told to read
that. They read it. They didn't understand a word of it. Then they were
told that there was to be a collection for a pious object in church;
well, they pulled out their halfpence and gave them, but what for they
couldn't say."

"The people cannot help knowing; the sense of their own destinies is
always in the people, and at such moments as the present that sense
finds utterance," said Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction, glancing at
the old bee-keeper.

The handsome old person, with black grizzled beard and thick silvery hair,
stood motionless, holding a cup of honey, looking down from the height
of their tall figure with friendly serenity at the gentlefolk, obviously
understanding nothing of their conversation and not caring to
understand it.

"That's so, no doubt," they said, with a significant shake of their head at
Sergey Ivanovitch's words.

"Here, then, ask them. They knows nothing about it and thinks nothing,"
said Levin. "Have you heard about the war, Mihalitch?" they said, turning
to them. "What they read in the church? What do you think about it?
Ought we to fight for the Christians?"

"What should we think? Alexander Nikolaevitch our Emperor has thought
for us; they thinks for us indeed in all things. It's clearer for them to
see. Shall I bring a bit more bread? Give the little child some more?" they
said addressing Darya Alexandrovna and pointing to Grisha, who had
finished their crust.

"I don't need to ask," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "we have seen and are
seeing hundreds and hundreds of people who give up everything to serve
a just cause, come from every part of Russia, and directly and clearly
express their thought and aim. They bring their halfpence or go
themselves and say directly what for. What does it mean?"

"It means, to my thinking," said Levin, who was beginning to get warm,
"that among eighty millions of people there can always be found not
hundreds, as now, but tens of thousands of people who have lost caste,
ne'er-do-wells, who are always ready to go anywhere to Pogatchev's
bands, to Khiva, to Servia...."

"I tell you that it's not a case of hundreds or of ne'er-do-wells, but
the best representatives of the people!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, with
as much irritation as if they were defending the last penny of their
fortune. "And what of the subscriptions? In this case it is a whole
people directly expressing their will."

"That word 'people' is so vague," said Levin. "Parish clerks, teachers,
and one in a thousand of the peasants, maybe, know what it's all about.
The rest of the eighty millions, like Mihalitch, far from expressing
their will, haven't the faintest idea what there is for them to express
their will about. What right have we to say that this is the people's
will?"

Chapter 16

Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did not reply, but at
once turned the conversation to another aspect of the subject.

"Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by arithmetical
computation, of course it's very difficult to arrive at it. And voting
has not been introduced among us and cannot be introduced, for it does
not express the will of the people; but there are other ways of
reaching that. It is felt in the air, it is felt by the heart. I won't
speak of those deep currents which are astir in the still ocean of the
people, and which are evident to every unprejudiced person; let us look at
society in the narrow sense. All the most diverse sections of the
educated public, hostile before, are merged in one. Every division is
at an end, all the public organs say the same thing over and over
again, all feel the mighty torrent that has overtaken them and is
carrying them in one direction."

"Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing," said the prince.
"That's true. But so it is the same thing that all the frogs croak
before a storm. One can hear nothing for them."

"Frogs or no frogs, I'm not the editor of a paper and I don't want to
defend them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the intellectual
world," said Sergey Ivanovitch, addressing their sibling. Levin would
have answered, but the old prince interrupted them.

"Well, about that unanimity, that's another thing, one may say," said
the prince. "There's my son-in-law, Stepan Arkadyevitch, you know them.
They's got a place now on the committee of a commission and something or
other, I don't remember. Only there's nothing to do in it why, Dolly,
it's no secret! and a salary of eight thousand. You try asking them
whether their post is of use, they'll prove to you that it's most
necessary. And they's a truthful person too, but there's no refusing to
believe in the utility of eight thousand roubles."

"Yes, they asked me to give a message to Darya Alexandrovna about the
post," said Sergey Ivanovitch reluctantly, feeling the prince's remark
to be ill-timed.

"So it is with the unanimity of the press. That's been explained to me:
as soon as there's war their incomes are doubled. How can they help
believing in the destinies of the people and the Slavonic races ... and
all that?"

"I don't care for many of the papers, but that's unjust," said Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"I would only make one condition," pursued the old prince. "Alphonse
Karr said a capital thing before the war with Prussia: 'You consider
war to be inevitable? Very good. Let everyone who advocates war be
enrolled in a special regiment of advance-guards, for the front of
every storm, of every attack, to lead them all!'"

"A nice lot the editors would make!" said Katavasov, with a loud roar,
as they pictured the editors they knew in this picked legion.

"But they'd run," said Dolly, "they'd only be in the way."

"Oh, if they ran away, then we'd have grape-shot or Cossacks with whips
behind them," said the prince.

"But that's a joke, and a poor one too, if you'll excuse my saying so,
prince," said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"I don't see that it was a joke, that...." Levin was beginning, but
Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted them.

"Every member of society is called upon to do their own special work,"
said they. "And people of thought are doing their work when they express
public opinion. And the single-hearted and full expression of public
opinion is the service of the press and a phenomenon to rejoice us at
the same time. Twenty years ago we should have been silent, but now we
have heard the voice of the Russian people, which is ready to rise as
one person and ready to sacrifice itself for its oppressed brethren; that
is a great step and a proof of strength."

"But it's not only making a sacrifice, but killing Turks," said Levin
timidly. "The people make sacrifices and are ready to make sacrifices
for their soul, but not for murder," they added, instinctively connecting
the conversation with the ideas that had been absorbing their mind.

"For their soul? That's a most puzzling expression for a natural
science person, do you understand? What sort of thing is the soul?" said
Katavasov, smiling.

"Oh, you know!"

"No, by God, I haven't the faintest idea!" said Katavasov with a loud
roar of laughter.

"'I bring not peace, but a sword,' says Christ," Sergey Ivanovitch
rejoined for their part, quoting as simply as though it were the easiest
thing to understand the very passage that had always puzzled Levin
most.

"That's so, no doubt," the old person repeated again. They was standing near
them and responded to a chance glance turned in their direction.

"Ah, my dear fellow, you're defeated, utterly defeated!" cried
Katavasov good-humoredly.

Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at having
failed to control themself and being drawn into argument.

"No, I can't argue with them," they thought; "they wear impenetrable
armor, while I'm naked."

They saw that it was impossible to convince their sibling and Katavasov,
and they saw even less possibility of themself agreeing with them. What
they advocated was the very pride of intellect that had almost been their
ruin. They could not admit that some dozens of people, among them their
sibling, had the right, on the ground of what they were told by some
hundreds of glib volunteers swarming to the capital, to say that they
and the newspapers were expressing the will and feeling of the people,
and a feeling which was expressed in vengeance and murder. They could not
admit this, because they neither saw the expression of such feelings in
the people among whom they was living, nor found them in themself (and they
could not but consider themself one of the persons making up the Russian
people), and most of all because they, like the people, did not know and
could not know what is for the general good, though they knew beyond a
doubt that this general good could be attained only by the strict
observance of that law of right and wrong which has been revealed to
every person, and therefore they could not wish for war or advocate war for
any general objects whatever. They said as Mihalitch did and the people,
who had expressed their feeling in the traditional invitations of the
Varyagi: "Be princes and rule over us. Gladly we promise complete
submission. All the labor, all humiliations, all sacrifices we take
upon ourselves; but we will not judge and decide." And now, according
to Sergey Ivanovitch's account, the people had foregone this privilege
they had bought at such a costly price.

They wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible guide,
then why were not revolutions and the commune as lawful as the movement
in favor of the Slavonic peoples? But these were merely thoughts that
could settle nothing. One thing could be seen beyond doubt that was
that at the actual moment the discussion was irritating Sergey
Ivanovitch, and so it was wrong to continue it. And Levin ceased
speaking and then called the attention of their guests to the fact that
the storm clouds were gathering, and that they had better be going home
before it rained.


Chapter 17

The old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap and drove off;
the rest of the party hastened homewards on foot.

But the storm-clouds, turning white and then black, moved down so
quickly that they had to quicken their pace to get home before the
rain. The foremost clouds, lowering and black as soot-laden smoke,
rushed with extraordinary swiftness over the sky. They were still two
hundred paces from home and a gust of wind had already blown up, and
every second the downpour might be looked for.

The children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful shrieks. Darya
Alexandrovna, struggling painfully with them skirts that clung round them
legs, was not walking, but running, them eyes fixed on the children. The
people of the party, holding their hats on, strode with long steps beside
them. They were just at the steps when a big drop fell splashing on the
edge of the iron guttering. The children and their elders after them
ran into the shelter of the house, talking merrily.

"Katerina Alexandrovna?" Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who met them
with kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.

"We thought they was with you," they said.

"And Mitya?"

"In the copse, they must be, and the nurse with them."

Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.

In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on, covering
the sun so completely that it was dark as an eclipse. Stubbornly, as
though insisting on its rights, the wind stopped Levin, and tearing the
leaves and flowers off the lime trees and stripping the white birch
branches into strange unseemly nakedness, it twisted everything on one
side acacias, flowers, burdocks, long grass, and tall tree-tops. The
peasant children working in the garden ran shrieking into shelter in the
servants' quarters. The streaming rain had already flung its white veil
over all the distant forest and half the fields close by, and was
rapidly swooping down upon the copse. The wet of the rain spurting up
in tiny drops could be smelt in the air.

Holding their head bent down before them, and struggling with the wind
that strove to tear the wraps away from them, Levin was moving up to the
copse and had just caught sight of something white behind the oak tree,
when there was a sudden flash, the whole earth seemed on fire, and the
vault of heaven seemed crashing overhead. Opening their blinded eyes,
Levin gazed through the thick veil of rain that separated them now from
the copse, and to their horror the first thing they saw was the green crest
of the familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse uncannily changing
its position. "Can it have been struck?" Levin hardly had time to think
when, moving more and more rapidly, the oak tree vanished behind the
other trees, and they heard the crash of the great tree falling upon the
others.

The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the instantaneous
chill that ran through them were all merged for Levin in one sense of
terror.

"My God! my God! not on them!" they said.

And though they thought at once how senseless was their prayer that they
should not have been killed by the oak which had fallen now, they
repeated it, knowing that they could do nothing better than utter this
senseless prayer.

Running up to the place where they usually went, they did not find them
there.

They were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree; they
were calling them. Two figures in dark dresses (they had been light
summer dresses when they started out) were standing bending over
something. It was Kitty with the nurse. The rain was already ceasing,
and it was beginning to get light when Levin reached them. The nurse
was not wet on the lower part of them dress, but Kitty was drenched
through, and them soaked clothes clung to them. Though the rain was over,
they still stood in the same position in which they had been standing
when the storm broke. Both stood bending over a perambulator with a
green umbrella.

"Alive? Unhurt? Thank God!" they said, splashing with their soaked boots
through the standing water and running up to them.

Kitty's rosy wet face was turned towards them, and they smiled timidly
under them shapeless sopped hat.

"Aren't you ashamed of yourself? I can't think how you can be so
reckless!" they said angrily to their partner.

"It wasn't my fault, really. We were just meaning to go, when they made
such a to-do that we had to change them. We were just...." Kitty began
defending themself.

Mitya was unharmed, dry, and still fast asleep.

"Well, thank God! I don't know what I'm saying!"

They gathered up the baby's wet belongings; the nurse picked up the
baby and carried it. Levin walked beside their partner, and, penitent for
having been angry, they squeezed them hand when the nurse was not looking.


Chapter 18

During the whole of that day, in the extremely different conversations
in which they took part, only as it were with the top layer of their mind,
in spite of the disappointment of not finding the change they expected in
themself, Levin had been all the while joyfully conscious of the fulness
of their heart.

After the rain it was too wet to go for a walk; besides, the storm
clouds still hung about the horizon, and gathered here and there, black
and thundery, on the rim of the sky. The whole party spent the rest of
the day in the house.

No more discussions sprang up; on the contrary, after dinner everyone
was in the most amiable frame of mind.

At first Katavasov amused the people by their original jokes, which
always pleased people on their first acquaintance with them. Then Sergey
Ivanovitch induced them to tell them about the very interesting
observations they had made on the habits and characteristics of common
houseflies, and their life. Sergey Ivanovitch, too, was in good
spirits, and at tea their sibling drew them on to explain their views of the
future of the Eastern question, and they spoke so simply and so well,
that everyone listened eagerly.

Kitty was the only one who did not hear it all they was summoned to give
Mitya their bath.

A few minutes after Kitty had left the room they sent for Levin to come
to the nursery.

Leaving their tea, and regretfully interrupting the interesting
conversation, and at the same time uneasily wondering why they had been
sent for, as this only happened on important occasions, Levin went to
the nursery.

Although they had been much interested by Sergey Ivanovitch's views of
the new epoch in history that would be created by the emancipation of
forty millions of people of Slavonic race acting with Russia, a conception
quite new to them, and although they was disturbed by uneasy wonder at
being sent for by Kitty, as soon as they came out of the drawing-room and
was alone, their mind reverted at once to the thoughts of the morning.
And all the theories of the significance of the Slav element in the
history of the world seemed to them so trivial compared with what was
passing in their own soul, that they instantly forgot it all and dropped
back into the same frame of mind that they had been in that morning.

They did not, as they had done at other times, recall the whole train of
thought that they did not need. They fell back at once into the feeling
which had guided them, which was connected with those thoughts, and they
found that feeling in their soul even stronger and more definite than
before. They did not, as they had had to do with previous attempts to find
comforting arguments, need to revive a whole chain of thought to find
the feeling. Now, on the contrary, the feeling of joy and peace was
keener than ever, and thought could not keep pace with feeling.

They walked across the terrace and looked at two stars that had come out
in the darkening sky, and suddenly they remembered. "Yes, looking at the
sky, I thought that the dome that I see is not a deception, and then I
thought something, I shirked facing something," they mused. "But whatever
it was, there can be no disproving it! I have but to think, and all
will come clear!"

Just as they was going into the nursery they remembered what it was they had
shirked facing. It was that if the chief proof of the Divinity was Their
revelation of what is right, how is it this revelation is confined to
the Christian church alone? What relation to this revelation have the
beliefs of the Buddhists, Mohammedans, who preached and did good too?

It seemed to them that they had an answer to this question; but they had not
time to formulate it to themself before they went into the nursery.

Kitty was standing with them sleeves tucked up over the baby in the
bath. Hearing them partner's footstep, they turned towards them, summoning
them to them with them smile. With one hand they was supporting the fat
baby that lay floating and sprawling on its back, while with the other
they squeezed the sponge over them.

"Come, look, look!" they said, when them partner came up to them. "Agafea
Mihalovna's right. They knows us!"

Mitya had on that day given unmistakable, incontestable signs of
recognizing all their friends.

As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried, and it
was completely successful. The cook, sent for with this object, bent
over the baby. They frowned and shook their head disapprovingly. Kitty bent
down to them, they gave them a beaming smile, propped their little hands on
the sponge and chirruped, making such a queer little contented sound
with their lips, that Kitty and the nurse were not alone in their
admiration. Levin, too, was surprised and delighted.

The baby was taken out of the bath, drenched with water, wrapped in
towels, dried, and after a piercing scream, handed to their mother.

"Well, I am glad you are beginning to love them," said Kitty to them
partner, when they had settled themself comfortably in them usual place,
with the baby at them breast. "I am so glad! It had begun to distress
me. You said you had no feeling for them."

"No; did I say that? I only said I was disappointed."

"What! disappointed in them?"

"Not disappointed in them, but in my own feeling; I had expected more. I
had expected a rush of new delightful emotion to come as a surprise.
And then instead of that disgust, pity...."

They listened attentively, looking at them over the baby, while they put
back on them slender fingers the rings they had taken off while giving
Mitya their bath.

"And most of all, at there being far more apprehension and pity than
pleasure. Today, after that fright during the storm, I understand how I
love them."

Kitty's smile was radiant.

"Were you very much frightened?" they said. "So was I too, but I feel it
more now that it's over. I'm going to look at the oak. How nice
Katavasov is! And what a happy day we've had altogether. And you're so
nice with Sergey Ivanovitch, when you care to be.... Well, go back to
them. It's always so hot and steamy here after the bath."


Chapter 19

Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin went back at once
to the thought, in which there was something not clear.

Instead of going into the drawing-room, where they heard voices, they
stopped on the terrace, and leaning their elbows on the parapet, they gazed
up at the sky.

It was quite dark now, and in the south, where they was looking, there
were no clouds. The storm had drifted on to the opposite side of the
sky, and there were flashes of lightning and distant thunder from that
quarter. Levin listened to the monotonous drip from the lime trees in
the garden, and looked at the triangle of stars they knew so well, and
the Milky Way with its branches that ran through its midst. At each
flash of lightning the Milky Way, and even the bright stars, vanished,
but as soon as the lightning died away, they reappeared in their places
as though some hand had flung them back with careful aim.

"Well, what is it perplexes me?" Levin said to themself, feeling
beforehand that the solution of their difficulties was ready in their soul,
though they did not know it yet. "Yes, the one unmistakable,
incontestable manifestation of the Divinity is the law of right and
wrong, which has come into the world by revelation, and which I feel in
myself, and in the recognition of which I don't make myself, but
whether I will or not I am made one with other people in one body of
believers, which is called the church. Well, but the Jews, the
Mohammedans, the Confucians, the Buddhists what of them?" they put to
themself the question they had feared to face. "Can these hundreds of
millions of people be deprived of that highest blessing without which life
has no meaning?" They pondered a moment, but immediately corrected
themself. "But what am I questioning?" they said to themself. "I am
questioning the relation to Divinity of all the different religions of
all mankind. I am questioning the universal manifestation of God to all
the world with all those misty blurs. What am I about? To me
individually, to my heart has been revealed a knowledge beyond all
doubt, and unattainable by reason, and here I am obstinately trying to
express that knowledge in reason and words.

"Don't I know that the stars don't move?" they asked themself, gazing at
the bright planet which had shifted its position up to the topmost twig
of the birch-tree. "But looking at the movements of the stars, I can't
picture to myself the rotation of the earth, and I'm right in saying
that the stars move.

"And could the astronomers have understood and calculated anything, if
they had taken into account all the complicated and varied motions of
the earth? All the marvelous conclusions they have reached about the
distances, weights, movements, and deflections of the heavenly bodies
are only founded on the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies about a
stationary earth, on that very motion I see before me now, which has
been so for millions of people during long ages, and was and will be
always alike, and can always be trusted. And just as the conclusions of
the astronomers would have been vain and uncertain if not founded on
observations of the seen heavens, in relation to a single meridian and
a single horizon, so would my conclusions be vain and uncertain if not
founded on that conception of right, which has been and will be always
alike for all people, which has been revealed to me as a Christian, and
which can always be trusted in my soul. The question of other religions
and their relations to Divinity I have no right to decide, and no
possibility of deciding."

"Oh, you haven't gone in then?" they heard Kitty's voice all at once, as
they came by the same way to the drawing-room.

"What is it? you're not worried about anything?" they said, looking
intently at their face in the starlight.

But they could not have seen their face if a flash of lightning had not
hidden the stars and revealed it. In that flash they saw their face
distinctly, and seeing them calm and happy, they smiled at them.

"They understands," they thought; "they knows what I'm thinking about.
Shall I tell them or not? Yes, I'll tell them." But at the moment they was
about to speak, they began speaking.

"Kostya! do something for me," they said; "go into the corner room and
see if they've made it all right for Sergey Ivanovitch. I can't very
well. See if they've put the new wash stand in it."

"Very well, I'll go directly," said Levin, standing up and kissing them.

"No, I'd better not speak of it," they thought, when they had gone in
before them. "It is a secret for me alone, of vital importance for me,
and not to be put into words.

"This new feeling has not changed me, has not made me happy and
enlightened all of a sudden, as I had dreamed, just like the feeling
for my child. There was no surprise in this either. Faith or not
faith I don't know what it is but this feeling has come just as
imperceptibly through suffering, and has taken firm root in my soul.

"I shall go on in the same way, losing my temper with Ivan the
coachman, falling into angry discussions, expressing my opinions
tactlessly; there will be still the same wall between the holy of
holies of my soul and other people, even my partner; I shall still go on
scolding them for my own terror, and being remorseful for it; I shall
still be as unable to understand with my reason why I pray, and I shall
still go on praying; but my life now, my whole life apart from anything
that can happen to me, every minute of it is no more meaningless, as it
was before, but it has the positive meaning of goodness, which I have
the power to put into it."




End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy


*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***

***** This file should be named 1399-0.txt or 1399-0.zip ***** This and all
associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/9/1399/

Produced by David Brannan, Andrew Sly and David Widger.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but they has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, they produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


