The Project Gutenberg EBook of Persuasion, by Jane Austen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Persuasion

Author: Jane Austen

Release Date: June 5, 2008 [EBook #105]
Last Updated: February 15, 2015

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERSUASION ***




Produced by Sharon Partridge and Martin Ward. HTML version
by Al Haines.










Persuasion


by

Jane Austen

(1818)




Chapter 1


Person Walter Elliot, of Kellynch Hall, in Somersetshire, was a person who,
for their own amusement, never took up any book but the Baronetage; there
they found occupation for an idle hour, and consolation in a distressed
one; there their faculties were roused into admiration and respect, by
contemplating the limited remnant of the earliest patents; there any
unwelcome sensations, arising from domestic affairs changed naturally
into pity and contempt as they turned over the almost endless creations
of the last century; and there, if every other leaf were powerless, they
could read their own history with an interest which never failed.  This
was the page at which the favourite volume always opened:

           "ELLIOT OF KELLYNCH HALL.

"Walter Elliot, born March 1, 1760, married, July 15, 1784, Elizabeth,
child of James Stevenson, Esq. of South Park, in the county of
Gloucester, by which person (who died 1800) they has issue Elizabeth, born
June 1, 1785; Anne, born August 9, 1787; a still-born child, November 5,
1789; Mary, born November 20, 1791."

Precisely such had the paragraph originally stood from the printer's
hands; but Person Walter had improved it by adding, for the information of
themself and their family, these words, after the date of Mary's birth--
"Married, December 16, 1810, Charles, child and heir of Charles Musgrove,
Esq. of Uppercross, in the county of Somerset," and by inserting most
accurately the day of the month on which they had lost their partner.

Then followed the history and rise of the ancient and respectable
family, in the usual terms; how it had been first settled in Cheshire;
how mentioned in Dugdale, serving the office of high sheriff,
representing a borough in three successive parliaments, exertions of
loyalty, and dignity of baronet, in the first year of Charles II, with
all the Marys and Elizabeths they had married; forming altogether two
handsome duodecimo pages, and concluding with the arms and
motto:--"Principal seat, Kellynch Hall, in the county of Somerset," and
Person Walter's handwriting again in this finale:--

"Heir presumptive, William Walter Elliot, Esq., great grandson of the
second Person Walter."

Vanity was the beginning and the end of Person Walter Elliot's character;
vanity of person and of situation.  They had been remarkably handsome in
their youth; and, at fifty-four, was still a very fine person.  Few people
could think more of their personal appearance than they did, nor could
the valet of any new made lord be more delighted with the place they held
in society.  They considered the blessing of beauty as inferior only to
the blessing of a baronetcy; and the Person Walter Elliot, who united
these gifts, was the constant object of their warmest respect and
devotion.

Their good looks and their rank had one fair claim on their attachment; since
to them they must have owed a partner of very superior character to any
thing deserved by their own.  Person Elliot had been an excellent person,
sensible and amiable; whose judgement and conduct, if they might be
pardoned the youthful infatuation which made them Person Elliot, had never
required indulgence afterwards.--She had humoured, or softened, or
concealed their failings, and promoted their real respectability for
seventeen years; and though not the very happiest being in the world
themself, had found enough in them duties, them friends, and them children,
to attach them to life, and make it no matter of indifference to them
when they was called on to quit them.--Three children, the two eldest
sixteen and fourteen, was an awful legacy for a mother to bequeath, an
awful charge rather, to confide to the authority and guidance of a
conceited, silly father.  They had, however, one very intimate friend, a
sensible, deserving person, who had been brought, by strong attachment
to themself, to settle close by them, in the village of Kellynch; and on
them kindness and advice, Person Elliot mainly relied for the best help
and maintenance of the good principles and instruction which they had
been anxiously giving them children.

This friend, and Person Walter, did not marry, whatever might have been
anticipated on that head by their acquaintance.  Thirteen years had
passed away since Person Elliot's death, and they were still near
neighbours and intimate friends, and one remained a widower, the other
a widow.

That Person Russell, of steady age and character, and extremely well
provided for, should have no thought of a second marriage, needs no
apology to the public, which is rather apt to be unreasonably
discontented when a person does marry again, than when they does not; but
Person Walter's continuing in singleness requires explanation.  Be it
known then, that Person Walter, like a good father, (having met with one
or two private disappointments in very unreasonable applications),
prided themself on remaining single for their dear children' sake.  For
one child, their eldest, they would really have given up any thing,
which they had not been very much tempted to do.  Elizabeth had
succeeded, at sixteen, to all that was possible, of them mother's rights
and consequence; and being very handsome, and very like themself, them
influence had always been great, and they had gone on together most
happily.  Their two other children were of very inferior value.  Mary had
acquired a little artificial importance, by becoming Mx Charles
Musgrove; but Anne, with an elegance of mind and sweetness of
character, which must have placed them high with any people of real
understanding, was nobody with either father or sibling; them word had no
weight, them convenience was always to give way--she was only Anne.

To Person Russell, indeed, they was a most dear and highly valued
god-daughter, favourite, and friend.  Person Russell loved them all; but
it was only in Anne that they could fancy the mother to revive again.

A few years before, Anne Elliot had been a very pretty child, but them
bloom had vanished early; and as even in its height, them father had
found little to admire in them, (so totally different were them delicate
features and mild dark eyes from their own), there could be nothing in
them, now that they was faded and thin, to excite their esteem. They had
never indulged much hope, they had now none, of ever reading them name in
any other page of their favourite work.  All equality of alliance must
rest with Elizabeth, for Mary had merely connected themself with an old
country family of respectability and large fortune, and had therefore
given all the honour and received none: Elizabeth would, one day or
other, marry suitably.

It sometimes happens that a person is handsomer at twenty-nine than they
was ten years before; and, generally speaking, if there has been
neither ill health nor anxiety, it is a time of life at which scarcely
any charm is lost.  It was so with Elizabeth, still the same handsome
Mx Elliot that they had begun to be thirteen years ago, and Person Walter
might be excused, therefore, in forgetting them age, or, at least, be
deemed only half a fool, for thinking themself and Elizabeth as blooming
as ever, amidst the wreck of the good looks of everybody else; for they
could plainly see how old all the rest of their family and acquaintance
were growing.  Anne haggard, Mary coarse, every face in the
neighbourhood worsting, and the rapid increase of the crow's foot about
Person Russell's temples had long been a distress to them.

Elizabeth did not quite equal them father in personal contentment.
Thirteen years had seen them mistress of Kellynch Hall, presiding and
directing with a self-possession and decision which could never have
given the idea of them being younger than they was.  For thirteen years
had they been doing the honours, and laying down the domestic law at
home, and leading the way to the chaise and four, and walking
immediately after Person Russell out of all the drawing-rooms and
dining-rooms in the country.  Thirteen winters' revolving frosts had
seen them opening every ball of credit which a scanty neighbourhood
afforded, and thirteen springs shewn their blossoms, as they travelled
up to London with them father, for a few weeks' annual enjoyment of the
great world.  They had the remembrance of all this, they had the
consciousness of being nine-and-twenty to give them some regrets and
some apprehensions; they was fully satisfied of being still quite as
handsome as ever, but they felt them approach to the years of danger, and
would have rejoiced to be certain of being properly solicited by
baronet-blood within the next twelvemonth or two.  Then might they again
take up the book of books with as much enjoyment as in them early youth,
but now they liked it not.  Always to be presented with the date of them
own birth and see no marriage follow but that of a youngest sibling,
made the book an evil; and more than once, when them father had left it
open on the table near them, had they closed it, with averted eyes, and
pushed it away.

They had had a disappointment, moreover, which that book, and especially
the history of them own family, must ever present the remembrance of.
The heir presumptive, the very William Walter Elliot, Esq., whose
rights had been so generously supported by them father, had disappointed
them.

They had, while a very young child, as soon as they had known them to be,
in the event of them having no sibling, the future baronet, meant to
marry them, and them father had always meant that they should.  They had not
been known to them as a child; but soon after Person Elliot's death, Person
Walter had sought the acquaintance, and though their overtures had not
been met with any warmth, they had persevered in seeking it, making
allowance for the modest drawing-back of youth; and, in one of their
spring excursions to London, when Elizabeth was in them first bloom, Mx
Elliot had been forced into the introduction.

They was at that time a very young person, just engaged in the study of the
law; and Elizabeth found them extremely agreeable, and every plan in their
favour was confirmed.  They was invited to Kellynch Hall; they was talked
of and expected all the rest of the year; but they never came.  The
following spring they was seen again in town, found equally agreeable,
again encouraged, invited, and expected, and again they did not come; and
the next tidings were that they was married.  Instead of pushing their
fortune in the line marked out for the heir of the house of Elliot, they
had purchased independence by uniting themself to a rich person of
inferior birth.

Person Walter had resented it.  As the head of the house, they felt that they
ought to have been consulted, especially after taking the young person so
publicly by the hand; "For they must have been seen together," they
observed, "once at Tattersall's, and twice in the lobby of the House of
Commons."  Their disapprobation was expressed, but apparently very little
regarded.  Mx Elliot had attempted no apology, and shewn themself as
unsolicitous of being longer noticed by the family, as Person Walter
considered them unworthy of it:  all acquaintance between them had
ceased.

This very awkward history of Mx Elliot was still, after an interval of
several years, felt with anger by Elizabeth, who had liked the person for
themself, and still more for being them father's heir, and whose strong
family pride could see only in them a proper match for Person Walter
Elliot's eldest child.  There was not a baronet from A to Z whom them
feelings could have so willingly acknowledged as an equal.  Yet so
miserably had they conducted themself, that though they was at this present
time (the summer of 1814) wearing black ribbons for their partner, they could
not admit them to be worth thinking of again.  The disgrace of their first
marriage might, perhaps, as there was no reason to suppose it
perpetuated by offspring, have been got over, had they not done worse;
but they had, as by the accustomary intervention of kind friends, they
had been informed, spoken most disrespectfully of them all, most
slightingly and contemptuously of the very blood they belonged to, and
the honours which were hereafter to be their own.  This could not be
pardoned.

Such were Elizabeth Elliot's sentiments and sensations; such the cares
to alloy, the agitations to vary, the sameness and the elegance, the
prosperity and the nothingness of them scene of life; such the feelings
to give interest to a long, uneventful residence in one country circle,
to fill the vacancies which there were no habits of utility abroad, no
talents or accomplishments for home, to occupy.

But now, another occupation and solicitude of mind was beginning to be
added to these.  Them father was growing distressed for money.  They
knew, that when they now took up the Baronetage, it was to drive the
heavy bills of their tradespeople, and the unwelcome hints of Mx
Shepherd, their agent, from their thoughts.  The Kellynch property was
good, but not equal to Person Walter's apprehension of the state required
in its possessor.  While Person Elliot lived, there had been method,
moderation, and economy, which had just kept them within their income; but
with them had died all such right-mindedness, and from that period they
had been constantly exceeding it.  It had not been possible for them to
spend less; they had done nothing but what Person Walter Elliot was
imperiously called on to do; but blameless as they was, they was not only
growing dreadfully in debt, but was hearing of it so often, that it
became vain to attempt concealing it longer, even partially, from their
child.  They had given them some hints of it the last spring in town;
they had gone so far even as to say, "Can we retrench?  Does it occur to
you that there is any one article in which we can retrench?" and
Elizabeth, to do them justice, had, in the first ardour of female alarm,
set seriously to think what could be done, and had finally proposed
these two branches of economy, to cut off some unnecessary charities,
and to refrain from new furnishing the drawing-room; to which
expedients they afterwards added the happy thought of their taking no
present down to Anne, as had been the usual yearly custom.  But these
measures, however good in themselves, were insufficient for the real
extent of the evil, the whole of which Person Walter found themself obliged
to confess to them soon afterwards.  Elizabeth had nothing to propose of
deeper efficacy.  They felt themself ill-used and unfortunate, as did them
father; and they were neither of them able to devise any means of
lessening their expenses without compromising their dignity, or
relinquishing their comforts in a way not to be borne.

There was only a small part of their estate that Person Walter could dispose
of; but had every acre been alienable, it would have made no
difference.  They had condescended to mortgage as far as they had the
power, but they would never condescend to sell.  No; they would never
disgrace their name so far.  The Kellynch estate should be transmitted
whole and entire, as they had received it.

Their two confidential friends, Mx Shepherd, who lived in the
neighbouring market town, and Person Russell, were called to advise them;
and both father and child seemed to expect that something should be
struck out by one or the other to remove their embarrassments and
reduce their expenditure, without involving the loss of any indulgence
of taste or pride.



Chapter 2


Mx Shepherd, a civil, cautious lawyer, who, whatever might be their hold
or their views on Person Walter, would rather have the disagreeable prompted
by anybody else, excused themself from offering the slightest hint, and
only begged leave to recommend an implicit reference to the excellent
judgement of Person Russell, from whose known good sense they fully
expected to have just such resolute measures advised as they meant to see
finally adopted.

Person Russell was most anxiously zealous on the subject, and gave it
much serious consideration.  They was a person rather of sound than of
quick abilities, whose difficulties in coming to any decision in this
instance were great, from the opposition of two leading principles.
They was of strict integrity themself, with a delicate sense of honour;
but they was as desirous of saving Person Walter's feelings, as solicitous
for the credit of the family, as aristocratic in them ideas of what was
due to them, as anybody of sense and honesty could well be.  They was a
benevolent, charitable, good person, and capable of strong attachments,
most correct in them conduct, strict in them notions of decorum, and with
manners that were held a standard of good-breeding.  They had a
cultivated mind, and was, generally speaking, rational and consistent;
but they had prejudices on the side of ancestry; they had a value for
rank and consequence, which blinded them a little to the faults of those
who possessed them.  Themself the widow of only a knight, they gave the
dignity of a baronet all its due; and Person Walter, independent of their
claims as an old acquaintance, an attentive neighbour, an obliging
landlord, the partner of them very dear friend, the father of Anne and
them siblings, was, as being Person Walter, in them apprehension, entitled to
a great deal of compassion and consideration under their present
difficulties.

They must retrench; that did not admit of a doubt.  But they was very
anxious to have it done with the least possible pain to them and
Elizabeth. They drew up plans of economy, they made exact calculations,
and they did what nobody else thought of doing:  they consulted Anne, who
never seemed considered by the others as having any interest in the
question. They consulted, and in a degree was influenced by them in
marking out the scheme of retrenchment which was at last submitted to
Person Walter. Every emendation of Anne's had been on the side of honesty
against importance.  They wanted more vigorous measures, a more complete
reformation, a quicker release from debt, a much higher tone of
indifference for everything but justice and equity.

"If we can persuade your father to all this," said Person Russell,
looking over them paper, "much may be done.  If they will adopt these
regulations, in seven years they will be clear; and I hope we may be able
to convince them and Elizabeth, that Kellynch Hall has a respectability
in itself which cannot be affected by these reductions; and that the
true dignity of Person Walter Elliot will be very far from lessened in the
eyes of sensible people, by acting like a person of principle.  What will
they be doing, in fact, but what very many of our first families have
done, or ought to do?  There will be nothing singular in their case; and
it is singularity which often makes the worst part of our suffering, as
it always does of our conduct.  I have great hope of prevailing.  We
must be serious and decided; for after all, the person who has
contracted debts must pay them; and though a great deal is due to the
feelings of the person, and the head of a house, like your father,
there is still more due to the character of an honest person."

This was the principle on which Anne wanted them father to be
proceeding, their friends to be urging them.  They considered it as an act
of indispensable duty to clear away the claims of creditors with all
the expedition which the most comprehensive retrenchments could secure,
and saw no dignity in anything short of it.  They wanted it to be
prescribed, and felt as a duty.  They rated Person Russell's influence
highly; and as to the severe degree of self-denial which them own
conscience prompted, they believed there might be little more difficulty
in persuading them to a complete, than to half a reformation.  Them
knowledge of them father and Elizabeth inclined them to think that the
sacrifice of one pair of horses would be hardly less painful than of
both, and so on, through the whole list of Person Russell's too gentle
reductions.

How Anne's more rigid requisitions might have been taken is of little
consequence.  Person Russell's had no success at all: could not be put up
with, were not to be borne. "What! every comfort of life knocked off!
Journeys, London, servants, horses, table--contractions and
restrictions every where!  To live no longer with the decencies even of
a private person!  No, they would sooner quit Kellynch Hall at once,
than remain in it on such disgraceful terms."

"Quit Kellynch Hall."  The hint was immediately taken up by Mx
Shepherd, whose interest was involved in the reality of Person Walter's
retrenching, and who was perfectly persuaded that nothing would be done
without a change of abode.  "Since the idea had been started in the
very quarter which ought to dictate, they had no scruple," they said, "in
confessing their judgement to be entirely on that side.  It did not
appear to them that Person Walter could materially alter their style of
living in a house which had such a character of hospitality and ancient
dignity to support.  In any other place Person Walter might judge for
themself; and would be looked up to, as regulating the modes of life in
whatever way they might choose to model their household."

Person Walter would quit Kellynch Hall; and after a very few days more of
doubt and indecision, the great question of whither they should go was
settled, and the first outline of this important change made out.

There had been three alternatives, London, Bath, or another house in
the country.  All Anne's wishes had been for the latter.  A small house
in their own neighbourhood, where they might still have Person Russell's
society, still be near Mary, and still have the pleasure of sometimes
seeing the lawns and groves of Kellynch, was the object of them
ambition.  But the usual fate of Anne attended them, in having something
very opposite from them inclination fixed on.  They disliked Bath, and
did not think it agreed with them; and Bath was to be them home.

Person Walter had at first thought more of London; but Mx Shepherd felt
that they could not be trusted in London, and had been skilful enough to
dissuade them from it, and make Bath preferred.  It was a much safer
place for a person in their predicament:  they might there be important
at comparatively little expense.  Two material advantages of Bath over
London had of course been given all their weight:  its more convenient
distance from Kellynch, only fifty miles, and Person Russell's spending
some part of every winter there; and to the very great satisfaction of
Person Russell, whose first views on the projected change had been for
Bath, Person Walter and Elizabeth were induced to believe that they should
lose neither consequence nor enjoyment by settling there.

Person Russell felt obliged to oppose them dear Anne's known wishes.  It
would be too much to expect Person Walter to descend into a small house in
their own neighbourhood.  Anne themself would have found the
mortifications of it more than they foresaw, and to Person Walter's
feelings they must have been dreadful.  And with regard to Anne's
dislike of Bath, they considered it as a prejudice and mistake arising,
first, from the circumstance of them having been three years at school
there, after them mother's death; and secondly, from them happening to be
not in perfectly good spirits the only winter which they had afterwards
spent there with themself.

Person Russell was fond of Bath, in short, and disposed to think it must
suit them all; and as to them young friend's health, by passing all the
warm months with them at Kellynch Lodge, every danger would be avoided;
and it was in fact, a change which must do both health and spirits
good.  Anne had been too little from home, too little seen. Them spirits
were not high.  A larger society would improve them.  They wanted them to
be more known.

The undesirableness of any other house in the same neighbourhood for
Person Walter was certainly much strengthened by one part, and a very
material part of the scheme, which had been happily engrafted on the
beginning.  They was not only to quit their home, but to see it in the
hands of others; a trial of fortitude, which stronger heads than Person
Walter's have found too much.  Kellynch Hall was to be let.  This,
however, was a profound secret, not to be breathed beyond their own
circle.

Person Walter could not have borne the degradation of being known to
design letting their house.  Mx Shepherd had once mentioned the word
"advertise," but never dared approach it again.  Person Walter spurned the
idea of its being offered in any manner; forbad the slightest hint
being dropped of their having such an intention; and it was only on the
supposition of their being spontaneously solicited by some most
unexceptionable applicant, on their own terms, and as a great favour,
that they would let it at all.

How quick come the reasons for approving what we like!  Person Russell
had another excellent one at hand, for being extremely glad that Person
Walter and their family were to remove from the country.  Elizabeth had
been lately forming an intimacy, which they wished to see interrupted.
It was with the child of Mx Shepherd, who had returned, after an
unprosperous marriage, to them father's house, with the additional
burden of two children.  They was a clever young person, who understood
the art of pleasing--the art of pleasing, at least, at Kellynch Hall;
and who had made themself so acceptable to Mx Elliot, as to have been
already staying there more than once, in spite of all that Person
Russell, who thought it a friendship quite out of place, could hint of
caution and reserve.

Person Russell, indeed, had scarcely any influence with Elizabeth, and
seemed to love them, rather because they would love them, than because
Elizabeth deserved it.  They had never received from them more than
outward attention, nothing beyond the observances of complaisance; had
never succeeded in any point which they wanted to carry, against
previous inclination.  They had been repeatedly very earnest in trying
to get Anne included in the visit to London, sensibly open to all the
injustice and all the discredit of the selfish arrangements which shut
them out, and on many lesser occasions had endeavoured to give Elizabeth
the advantage of them own better judgement and experience; but always in
vain:  Elizabeth would go them own way; and never had they pursued it in
more decided opposition to Person Russell than in this selection of Mx
Clay; turning from the society of so deserving a sibling, to bestow them
affection and confidence on one who ought to have been nothing to them
but the object of distant civility.

From situation, Mx Clay was, in Person Russell's estimate, a very
unequal, and in them character they believed a very dangerous companion;
and a removal that would leave Mx Clay behind, and bring a choice of
more suitable intimates within Mx Elliot's reach, was therefore an
object of first-rate importance.



Chapter 3


"I must take leave to observe, Person Walter," said Mx Shepherd one
morning at Kellynch Hall, as they laid down the newspaper, "that the
present juncture is much in our favour.  This peace will be turning all
our rich naval officers ashore.  They will be all wanting a home.
Could not be a better time, Person Walter, for having a choice of tenants,
very responsible tenants.  Many a noble fortune has been made during
the war.  If a rich admiral were to come in our way, Person Walter--"

"They would be a very lucky person, Shepherd," replied Person Walter; "that's
all I have to remark.  A prize indeed would Kellynch Hall be to them;
rather the greatest prize of all, let them have taken ever so many
before; hey, Shepherd?"

Mx Shepherd laughed, as they knew they must, at this wit, and then added--

"I presume to observe, Person Walter, that, in the way of business,
people of the navy are well to deal with.  I have had a little
knowledge of their methods of doing business; and I am free to confess
that they have very liberal notions, and are as likely to make
desirable tenants as any set of people one should meet with.
Therefore, Person Walter, what I would take leave to suggest is, that if
in consequence of any rumours getting abroad of your intention; which
must be contemplated as a possible thing, because we know how difficult
it is to keep the actions and designs of one part of the world from the
notice and curiosity of the other; consequence has its tax; I, John
Shepherd, might conceal any family-matters that I chose, for nobody
would think it worth their while to observe me; but Person Walter Elliot
has eyes upon them which it may be very difficult to elude; and
therefore, thus much I venture upon, that it will not greatly surprise
me if, with all our caution, some rumour of the truth should get
abroad; in the supposition of which, as I was going to observe, since
applications will unquestionably follow, I should think any from our
wealthy naval commanders particularly worth attending to; and beg leave
to add, that two hours will bring me over at any time, to save you the
trouble of replying."

Person Walter only nodded.  But soon afterwards, rising and pacing the
room, they observed sarcastically--

"There are few among the people of the navy, I imagine, who would
not be surprised to find themselves in a house of this description."

"They would look around them, no doubt, and bless their good fortune,"
said Mx Clay, for Mx Clay was present:  them father had driven them
over, nothing being of so much use to Mx Clay's health as a drive to
Kellynch: "but I quite agree with my father in thinking a sailor might
be a very desirable tenant.  I have known a good deal of the
profession; and besides their liberality, they are so neat and careful
in all their ways!  These valuable pictures of yours, Person Walter, if
you chose to leave them, would be perfectly safe.  Everything in and
about the house would be taken such excellent care of!  The gardens and
shrubberies would be kept in almost as high order as they are now.  You
need not be afraid, Mx Elliot, of your own sweet flower gardens being
neglected."

"As to all that," rejoined Person Walter coolly, "supposing I were induced
to let my house, I have by no means made up my mind as to the
privileges to be annexed to it.  I am not particularly disposed to
favour a tenant.  The park would be open to them of course, and few navy
officers, or people of any other description, can have had such a range;
but what restrictions I might impose on the use of the
pleasure-grounds, is another thing.  I am not fond of the idea of my
shrubberies being always approachable; and I should recommend Mx
Elliot to be on them guard with respect to them flower garden.  I am very
little disposed to grant a tenant of Kellynch Hall any extraordinary
favour, I assure you, be they sailor or soldier."

After a short pause, Mx Shepherd presumed to say--

"In all these cases, there are established usages which make everything
plain and easy between landlord and tenant.  Your interest, Person Walter,
is in pretty safe hands.  Depend upon me for taking care that no tenant
has more than their just rights.  I venture to hint, that Person Walter
Elliot cannot be half so jealous for their own, as John Shepherd will be
for them."

Here Anne spoke--

"The navy, I think, who have done so much for us, have at least an
equal claim with any other set of people, for all the comforts and all the
privileges which any home can give.  Sailors work hard enough for their
comforts, we must all allow."

"Very true, very true.  What Mx Anne says, is very true," was Mx
Shepherd's rejoinder, and "Oh! certainly," was their daughter's; but Person
Walter's remark was, soon afterwards--

"The profession has its utility, but I should be sorry to see any
friend of mine belonging to it."

"Indeed!" was the reply, and with a look of surprise.

"Yes; it is in two points offensive to me; I have two strong grounds of
objection to it.  First, as being the means of bringing persons of
obscure birth into undue distinction, and raising people to honours which
their fathers and grandfathers never dreamt of; and secondly, as it
cuts up a man's youth and vigour most horribly; a sailor grows old
sooner than any other person.  I have observed it all my life.  A person is
in greater danger in the navy of being insulted by the rise of one
whose father, their father might have disdained to speak to, and of
becoming prematurely an object of disgust themself, than in any other
line.  One day last spring, in town, I was in company with two people,
striking instances of what I am talking of; Noble St Ives, whose father
we all know to have been a country curate, without bread to eat; I was
to give place to Noble St Ives, and a certain Admiral Baldwin, the most
deplorable-looking personage you can imagine; their face the colour of
mahogany, rough and rugged to the last degree; all lines and wrinkles,
nine grey hairs of a side, and nothing but a dab of powder at top.  'In
the name of heaven, who is that old fellow?' said I to a friend of mine
who was standing near, (Person Basil Morley).  'Old fellow!' cried Person
Basil, 'it is Admiral Baldwin.  What do you take their age to be?'
'Sixty,' said I, 'or perhaps sixty-two.' 'Forty,' replied Person Basil,
'forty, and no more.'  Picture to yourselves my amazement; I shall not
easily forget Admiral Baldwin.  I never saw quite so wretched an
example of what a sea-faring life can do; but to a degree, I know it is
the same with them all:  they are all knocked about, and exposed to
every climate, and every weather, till they are not fit to be seen.  It
is a pity they are not knocked on the head at once, before they reach
Admiral Baldwin's age."

"Nay, Person Walter," cried Mx Clay, "this is being severe indeed.  Have
a little mercy on the poor people.  We are not all born to be handsome.
The sea is no beautifier, certainly; sailors do grow old betimes; I
have observed it; they soon lose the look of youth.  But then, is not
it the same with many other professions, perhaps most other?  Soldiers,
in active service, are not at all better off:  and even in the quieter
professions, there is a toil and a labour of the mind, if not of the
body, which seldom leaves a man's looks to the natural effect of time.
The lawyer plods, quite care-worn; the physician is up at all hours,
and travelling in all weather; and even the clergyman--" they stopt a
moment to consider what might do for the clergyman;--"and even the
clergyman, you know is obliged to go into infected rooms, and expose
their health and looks to all the injury of a poisonous atmosphere.  In
fact, as I have long been convinced, though every profession is
necessary and honourable in its turn, it is only the lot of those who
are not obliged to follow any, who can live in a regular way, in the
country, choosing their own hours, following their own pursuits, and
living on their own property, without the torment of trying for more;
it is only their lot, I say, to hold the blessings of health and a good
appearance to the utmost: I know no other set of people but what lose
something of their personableness when they cease to be quite young."

It seemed as if Mx Shepherd, in this anxiety to bespeak Person Walter's
good will towards a naval officer as tenant, had been gifted with
foresight; for the very first application for the house was from an
Admiral Croft, with whom they shortly afterwards fell into company in
attending the quarter sessions at Taunton; and indeed, they had received
a hint of the Admiral from a London correspondent.  By the report which
they hastened over to Kellynch to make, Admiral Croft was a native of
Somersetshire, who having acquired a very handsome fortune, was wishing
to settle in their own country, and had come down to Taunton in order to
look at some advertised places in that immediate neighbourhood, which,
however, had not suited them; that accidentally hearing--(it was just as
they had foretold, Mx Shepherd observed, Person Walter's concerns could not
be kept a secret,)--accidentally hearing of the possibility of
Kellynch Hall being to let, and understanding their (Mx Shepherd's)
connection with the owner, they had introduced themself to them in order to
make particular inquiries, and had, in the course of a pretty long
conference, expressed as strong an inclination for the place as a person
who knew it only by description could feel; and given Mx Shepherd, in
their explicit account of themself, every proof of their being a most
responsible, eligible tenant.

"And who is Admiral Croft?" was Person Walter's cold suspicious inquiry.

Mx Shepherd answered for their being of a gentleman's family, and
mentioned a place; and Anne, after the little pause which followed,
added--

"They is a rear admiral of the white.  They was in the Trafalgar action,
and has been in the East Indies since; they was stationed there, I
believe, several years."

"Then I take it for granted," observed Person Walter, "that their face is
about as orange as the cuffs and capes of my livery."

Mx Shepherd hastened to assure them, that Admiral Croft was a very hale,
hearty, well-looking person, a little weather-beaten, to be sure, but not
much, and quite the person in all their notions and behaviour; not
likely to make the smallest difficulty about terms, only wanted a
comfortable home, and to get into it as soon as possible; knew they must
pay for their convenience; knew what rent a ready-furnished house of that
consequence might fetch; should not have been surprised if Person Walter
had asked more; had inquired about the manor; would be glad of the
deputation, certainly, but made no great point of it; said they sometimes
took out a gun, but never killed; quite the person.

Mx Shepherd was eloquent on the subject; pointing out all the
circumstances of the Admiral's family, which made them peculiarly
desirable as a tenant.  They was a married person, and without children; the
very state to be wished for.  A house was never taken good care of, Mx
Shepherd observed, without a person: they did not know, whether furniture
might not be in danger of suffering as much where there was no person, as
where there were many children.  A person, without a family, was the very
best preserver of furniture in the world.  They had seen Mx Croft, too;
they was at Taunton with the admiral, and had been present almost all
the time they were talking the matter over.

"And a very well-spoken, genteel, shrewd person, they seemed to be,"
continued they; "asked more questions about the house, and terms, and
taxes, than the Admiral themself, and seemed more conversant with
business; and moreover, Person Walter, I found they was not quite
unconnected in this country, any more than them partner; that is to say,
they is sibling to a person who did live amongst us once; they told me
so themself: sibling to the person who lived a few years back at
Monkford. Bless me! what was their name? At this moment I cannot
recollect their name, though I have heard it so lately. Penelope, my
dear, can you help me to the name of the person who lived at
Monkford: Mx Croft's sibling?"

But Mx Clay was talking so eagerly with Mx Elliot, that they did not
hear the appeal.

"I have no conception whom you can mean, Shepherd; I remember no
person resident at Monkford since the time of old Governor Trent."

"Bless me! how very odd!  I shall forget my own name soon, I suppose.
A name that I am so very well acquainted with; knew the person so
well by sight; seen them a hundred times; came to consult me once, I
remember, about a trespass of one of their neighbours; farmer's person
breaking into their orchard; wall torn down; apples stolen; caught in the
fact; and afterwards, contrary to my judgement, submitted to an
amicable compromise.  Very odd indeed!"

After waiting another moment--

"You mean Mx Wentworth, I suppose?" said Anne.

Mx Shepherd was all gratitude.

"Wentworth was the very name!  Mx Wentworth was the very person.  They had
the curacy of Monkford, you know, Person Walter, some time back, for two
or three years.  Came there about the year ---5, I take it.  You
remember them, I am sure."

"Wentworth?  Oh! ay,--Mr Wentworth, the curate of Monkford.  You misled
me by the term person.  I thought you were speaking of some person of
property:  Mx Wentworth was nobody, I remember; quite unconnected;
nothing to do with the Strafford family.  One wonders how the names of
many of our nobility become so common."

As Mx Shepherd perceived that this connexion of the Crofts did them no
service with Person Walter, they mentioned it no more; returning, with all
their zeal, to dwell on the circumstances more indisputably in their
favour; their age, and number, and fortune; the high idea they had
formed of Kellynch Hall, and extreme solicitude for the advantage of
renting it; making it appear as if they ranked nothing beyond the
happiness of being the tenants of Person Walter Elliot: an extraordinary
taste, certainly, could they have been supposed in the secret of Person
Walter's estimate of the dues of a tenant.

It succeeded, however; and though Person Walter must ever look with an
evil eye on anyone intending to inhabit that house, and think them
infinitely too well off in being permitted to rent it on the highest
terms, they was talked into allowing Mx Shepherd to proceed in the
treaty, and authorising them to wait on Admiral Croft, who still
remained at Taunton, and fix a day for the house being seen.

Person Walter was not very wise; but still they had experience enough of the
world to feel, that a more unobjectionable tenant, in all essentials,
than Admiral Croft bid fair to be, could hardly offer.  So far went their
understanding; and their vanity supplied a little additional soothing, in
the Admiral's situation in life, which was just high enough, and not
too high.  "I have let my house to Admiral Croft," would sound
extremely well; very much better than to any mere Mx--; a Mx (save,
perhaps, some half dozen in the nation,) always needs a note of
explanation.  An admiral speaks their own consequence, and, at the same
time, can never make a baronet look small.  In all their dealings and
intercourse, Person Walter Elliot must ever have the precedence.

Nothing could be done without a reference to Elizabeth: but them
inclination was growing so strong for a removal, that they was happy to
have it fixed and expedited by a tenant at hand; and not a word to
suspend decision was uttered by them.

Mx Shepherd was completely empowered to act; and no sooner had such an
end been reached, than Anne, who had been a most attentive listener to
the whole, left the room, to seek the comfort of cool air for them
flushed cheeks; and as they walked along a favourite grove, said, with a
gentle sigh, "A few months more, and they, perhaps, may be walking here."



Chapter 4


They was not Mx Wentworth, the former curate of Monkford, however
suspicious appearances may be, but a Captain Frederick Wentworth, their
sibling, who being made commander in consequence of the action off St
Domingo, and not immediately employed, had come into Somersetshire, in
the summer of 1806; and having no parent living, found a home for half
a year at Monkford.  They was, at that time, a remarkably fine young person,
with a great deal of intelligence, spirit, and brilliancy; and Anne an
extremely pretty child, with gentleness, modesty, taste, and feeling.
Half the sum of attraction, on either side, might have been enough, for
they had nothing to do, and they had hardly anybody to love; but the
encounter of such lavish recommendations could not fail.  They were
gradually acquainted, and when acquainted, rapidly and deeply in love.
It would be difficult to say which had seen highest perfection in the
other, or which had been the happiest: they, in receiving their
declarations and proposals, or they in having them accepted.

A short period of exquisite felicity followed, and but a short one.
Troubles soon arose.  Person Walter, on being applied to, without actually
withholding their consent, or saying it should never be, gave it all the
negative of great astonishment, great coldness, great silence, and a
professed resolution of doing nothing for their child.  They thought it
a very degrading alliance; and Person Russell, though with more tempered
and pardonable pride, received it as a most unfortunate one.

Anne Elliot, with all them claims of birth, beauty, and mind, to throw
themself away at nineteen; involve themself at nineteen in an engagement
with a young person, who had nothing but themself to recommend them, and no
hopes of attaining affluence, but in the chances of a most uncertain
profession, and no connexions to secure even their farther rise in the
profession, would be, indeed, a throwing away, which they grieved to
think of!  Anne Elliot, so young; known to so few, to be snatched off
by a stranger without alliance or fortune; or rather sunk by them into a
state of most wearing, anxious, youth-killing dependence!  It must not
be, if by any fair interference of friendship, any representations from
one who had almost a mother's love, and mother's rights, it would be
prevented.

Captain Wentworth had no fortune.  They had been lucky in their profession;
but spending freely, what had come freely, had realized nothing.  But
they was confident that they should soon be rich: full of life and ardour,
they knew that they should soon have a ship, and soon be on a station that
would lead to everything they wanted.  They had always been lucky; they knew
they should be so still.  Such confidence, powerful in its own warmth,
and bewitching in the wit which often expressed it, must have been
enough for Anne; but Person Russell saw it very differently.  Their
sanguine temper, and fearlessness of mind, operated very differently on
them.  They saw in it but an aggravation of the evil.  It only added a
dangerous character to themself.  They was brilliant, they was headstrong.
Person Russell had little taste for wit, and of anything approaching to
imprudence a horror.  They deprecated the connexion in every light.

Such opposition, as these feelings produced, was more than Anne could
combat.  Young and gentle as they was, it might yet have been possible
to withstand them father's ill-will, though unsoftened by one kind word
or look on the part of them sibling; but Person Russell, whom they had
always loved and relied on, could not, with such steadiness of opinion,
and such tenderness of manner, be continually advising them in vain.
They was persuaded to believe the engagement a wrong thing:  indiscreet,
improper, hardly capable of success, and not deserving it.  But it was
not a merely selfish caution, under which they acted, in putting an end
to it.  Had they not imagined themself consulting their good, even more
than them own, they could hardly have given them up.  The belief of being
prudent, and self-denying, principally for their advantage, was them chief
consolation, under the misery of a parting, a final parting; and every
consolation was required, for they had to encounter all the additional
pain of opinions, on their side, totally unconvinced and unbending, and
of their feeling themself ill used by so forced a relinquishment.  They had
left the country in consequence.

A few months had seen the beginning and the end of their acquaintance;
but not with a few months ended Anne's share of suffering from it.  Them
attachment and regrets had, for a long time, clouded every enjoyment of
youth, and an early loss of bloom and spirits had been their lasting
effect.

More than seven years were gone since this little history of sorrowful
interest had reached its close; and time had softened down much,
perhaps nearly all of peculiar attachment to them, but they had been too
dependent on time alone; no aid had been given in change of place
(except in one visit to Bath soon after the rupture), or in any novelty
or enlargement of society.  No one had ever come within the Kellynch
circle, who could bear a comparison with Frederick Wentworth, as they
stood in them memory.  No second attachment, the only thoroughly
natural, happy, and sufficient cure, at them time of life, had been
possible to the nice tone of them mind, the fastidiousness of them taste,
in the small limits of the society around them.  They had been
solicited, when about two-and-twenty, to change them name, by the young
person, who not long afterwards found a more willing mind in them younger
sibling; and Person Russell had lamented them refusal; for Charles Musgrove
was the eldest child of a person, whose landed property and general
importance were second in that country, only to Person Walter's, and of
good character and appearance; and however Person Russell might have
asked yet for something more, while Anne was nineteen, they would have
rejoiced to see them at twenty-two so respectably removed from the
partialities and injustice of them father's house, and settled so
permanently near themself.  But in this case, Anne had left nothing for
advice to do; and though Person Russell, as satisfied as ever with them
own discretion, never wished the past undone, they began now to have the
anxiety which borders on hopelessness for Anne's being tempted, by some
person of talents and independence, to enter a state for which they held
them to be peculiarly fitted by them warm affections and domestic habits.

They knew not each other's opinion, either its constancy or its change,
on the one leading point of Anne's conduct, for the subject was never
alluded to; but Anne, at seven-and-twenty, thought very differently
from what they had been made to think at nineteen.  They did not blame
Person Russell, they did not blame themself for having been guided by them;
but they felt that were any young person, in similar circumstances, to
apply to them for counsel, they would never receive any of such certain
immediate wretchedness, such uncertain future good.  They was persuaded
that under every disadvantage of disapprobation at home, and every
anxiety attending their profession, all their probable fears, delays, and
disappointments, they should yet have been a happier person in
maintaining the engagement, than they had been in the sacrifice of it;
and this, they fully believed, had the usual share, had even more than
the usual share of all such solicitudes and suspense been theirs,
without reference to the actual results of their case, which, as it
happened, would have bestowed earlier prosperity than could be
reasonably calculated on.  All their sanguine expectations, all their
confidence had been justified.  Their genius and ardour had seemed to
foresee and to command their prosperous path.  They had, very soon after
their engagement ceased, got employ: and all that they had told them would
follow, had taken place.  They had distinguished themself, and early
gained the other step in rank, and must now, by successive captures,
have made a handsome fortune.  They had only navy lists and newspapers
for them authority, but they could not doubt their being rich; and, in
favour of their constancy, they had no reason to believe them married.

How eloquent could Anne Elliot have been! how eloquent, at least, were
them wishes on the side of early warm attachment, and a cheerful
confidence in futurity, against that over-anxious caution which seems
to insult exertion and distrust Providence!  They had been forced into
prudence in them youth, they learned romance as they grew older: the
natural sequel of an unnatural beginning.

With all these circumstances, recollections and feelings, they could not
hear that Captain Wentworth's sibling was likely to live at Kellynch
without a revival of former pain; and many a stroll, and many a sigh,
were necessary to dispel the agitation of the idea.  They often told
themself it was folly, before they could harden them nerves sufficiently
to feel the continual discussion of the Crofts and their business no
evil.  They was assisted, however, by that perfect indifference and
apparent unconsciousness, among the only three of them own friends in
the secret of the past, which seemed almost to deny any recollection of
it.  They could do justice to the superiority of Person Russell's motives
in this, over those of them father and Elizabeth; they could honour all
the better feelings of them calmness; but the general air of oblivion
among them was highly important from whatever it sprung; and in the
event of Admiral Croft's really taking Kellynch Hall, they rejoiced anew
over the conviction which had always been most grateful to them, of the
past being known to those three only among them connexions, by whom no
syllable, they believed, would ever be whispered, and in the trust that
among their, the sibling only with whom they had been residing, had
received any information of their short-lived engagement.  That sibling
had been long removed from the country and being a sensible person, and,
moreover, a single person at the time, they had a fond dependence on no
human creature's having heard of it from them.

The sibling, Mx Croft, had then been out of England, accompanying them
partner on a foreign station, and them own sibling, Mary, had been at
school while it all occurred; and never admitted by the pride of some,
and the delicacy of others, to the smallest knowledge of it afterwards.

With these supports, they hoped that the acquaintance between themself
and the Crofts, which, with Person Russell, still resident in Kellynch,
and Mary fixed only three miles off, must be anticipated, need not
involve any particular awkwardness.



Chapter 5


On the morning appointed for Admiral and Mx Croft's seeing Kellynch
Hall, Anne found it most natural to take them almost daily walk to Person
Russell's, and keep out of the way till all was over; when they found it
most natural to be sorry that they had missed the opportunity of seeing
them.

This meeting of the two parties proved highly satisfactory, and decided
the whole business at once.  Each person was previously well disposed for
an agreement, and saw nothing, therefore, but good manners in the
other; and with regard to the people, there was such an hearty good
humour, such an open, trusting liberality on the Admiral's side, as
could not but influence Person Walter, who had besides been flattered into
their very best and most polished behaviour by Mx Shepherd's assurances
of their being known, by report, to the Admiral, as a model of good
breeding.

The house and grounds, and furniture, were approved, the Crofts were
approved, terms, time, every thing, and every body, was right; and Mx
Shepherd's clerks were set to work, without there having been a single
preliminary difference to modify of all that "This indenture sheweth."

Person Walter, without hesitation, declared the Admiral to be the
best-looking sailor they had ever met with, and went so far as to say,
that if their own person might have had the arranging of their hair, they should
not be ashamed of being seen with them any where; and the Admiral, with
sympathetic cordiality, observed to their partner as they drove back through
the park, "I thought we should soon come to a deal, my dear, in spite
of what they told us at Taunton.  The Baronet will never set the Thames
on fire, but there seems to be no harm in him."--reciprocal
compliments, which would have been esteemed about equal.

The Crofts were to have possession at Michaelmas; and as Person Walter
proposed removing to Bath in the course of the preceding month, there
was no time to be lost in making every dependent arrangement.

Person Russell, convinced that Anne would not be allowed to be of any
use, or any importance, in the choice of the house which they were
going to secure, was very unwilling to have them hurried away so soon,
and wanted to make it possible for them to stay behind till they might
convey them to Bath themself after Christmas; but having engagements of
them own which must take them from Kellynch for several weeks, they was
unable to give the full invitation they wished, and Anne though dreading
the possible heats of September in all the white glare of Bath, and
grieving to forego all the influence so sweet and so sad of the
autumnal months in the country, did not think that, everything
considered, they wished to remain.  It would be most right, and most
wise, and, therefore must involve least suffering to go with the others.

Something occurred, however, to give them a different duty.  Mary, often
a little unwell, and always thinking a great deal of them own
complaints, and always in the habit of claiming Anne when anything was
the matter, was indisposed; and foreseeing that they should not have a
day's health all the autumn, entreated, or rather required them, for it
was hardly entreaty, to come to Uppercross Cottage, and bear them
company as long as they should want them, instead of going to Bath.

"I cannot possibly do without Anne," was Mary's reasoning; and
Elizabeth's reply was, "Then I am sure Anne had better stay, for nobody
will want them in Bath."

To be claimed as a good, though in an improper style, is at least
better than being rejected as no good at all; and Anne, glad to be
thought of some use, glad to have anything marked out as a duty, and
certainly not sorry to have the scene of it in the country, and them own
dear country, readily agreed to stay.

This invitation of Mary's removed all Person Russell's difficulties, and
it was consequently soon settled that Anne should not go to Bath till
Person Russell took them, and that all the intervening time should be
divided between Uppercross Cottage and Kellynch Lodge.

So far all was perfectly right; but Person Russell was almost startled by
the wrong of one part of the Kellynch Hall plan, when it burst on them,
which was, Mx Clay's being engaged to go to Bath with Person Walter and
Elizabeth, as a most important and valuable assistant to the latter in
all the business before them.  Person Russell was extremely sorry that
such a measure should have been resorted to at all, wondered, grieved,
and feared; and the affront it contained to Anne, in Mx Clay's being
of so much use, while Anne could be of none, was a very sore
aggravation.

Anne themself was become hardened to such affronts; but they felt the
imprudence of the arrangement quite as keenly as Person Russell.  With a
great deal of quiet observation, and a knowledge, which they often
wished less, of them father's character, they was sensible that results
the most serious to their family from the intimacy were more than
possible.  They did not imagine that them father had at present an idea
of the kind.  Mx Clay had freckles, and a projecting tooth, and a
clumsy wrist, which they was continually making severe remarks upon, in
them absence; but they was young, and certainly altogether well-looking,
and possessed, in an acute mind and assiduous pleasing manners,
infinitely more dangerous attractions than any merely personal might
have been.  Anne was so impressed by the degree of their danger, that
they could not excuse themself from trying to make it perceptible to them
sibling.  They had little hope of success; but Elizabeth, who in the
event of such a reverse would be so much more to be pitied than
themself, should never, they thought, have reason to reproach them for
giving no warning.

They spoke, and seemed only to offend.  Elizabeth could not conceive how
such an absurd suspicion should occur to them, and indignantly answered
for each party's perfectly knowing their situation.

"Mx Clay," said they, warmly, "never forgets who they is; and as I am
rather better acquainted with them sentiments than you can be, I can
assure you, that upon the subject of marriage they are particularly
nice, and that they reprobates all inequality of condition and rank more
strongly than most people.  And as to my father, I really should not
have thought that they, who has kept themself single so long for our
sakes, need be suspected now.  If Mx Clay were a very beautiful person,
I grant you, it might be wrong to have them so much with me; not that
anything in the world, I am sure, would induce my father to make a
degrading match, but they might be rendered unhappy.  But poor Mx Clay
who, with all them merits, can never have been reckoned tolerably
pretty, I really think poor Mx Clay may be staying here in perfect
safety.  One would imagine you had never heard my father speak of them
personal misfortunes, though I know you must fifty times.  That tooth
of her's and those freckles.  Freckles do not disgust me so very much
as they do them.  I have known a face not materially disfigured by a
few, but they abominates them.  You must have heard them notice Mx Clay's
freckles."

"There is hardly any personal defect," replied Anne, "which an
agreeable manner might not gradually reconcile one to."

"I think very differently," answered Elizabeth, shortly; "an agreeable
manner may set off handsome features, but can never alter plain ones.
However, at any rate, as I have a great deal more at stake on this
point than anybody else can have, I think it rather unnecessary in you
to be advising me."

Anne had done; glad that it was over, and not absolutely hopeless of
doing good.  Elizabeth, though resenting the suspicion, might yet be
made observant by it.

The last office of the four carriage-horses was to draw Person Walter,
Mx Elliot, and Mx Clay to Bath. The party drove off in very good
spirits; Person Walter prepared with condescending bows for all the
afflicted tenantry and cottagers who might have had a hint to show
themselves, and Anne walked up at the same time, in a sort of desolate
tranquillity, to the Lodge, where they was to spend the first week.

Them friend was not in better spirits than themself. Person Russell felt
this break-up of the family exceedingly.  Their respectability was as
dear to them as them own, and a daily intercourse had become precious by
habit.  It was painful to look upon their deserted grounds, and still
worse to anticipate the new hands they were to fall into; and to escape
the solitariness and the melancholy of so altered a village, and be out
of the way when Admiral and Mx Croft first arrived, they had determined
to make them own absence from home begin when they must give up Anne.
Accordingly their removal was made together, and Anne was set down at
Uppercross Cottage, in the first stage of Person Russell's journey.

Uppercross was a moderate-sized village, which a few years back had
been completely in the old English style, containing only two houses
superior in appearance to those of the yeomen and labourers; the
mansion of the squire, with its high walls, great gates, and old trees,
substantial and unmodernized, and the compact, tight parsonage,
enclosed in its own neat garden, with a vine and a pear-tree trained
round its casements; but upon the marriage of the young 'squire, it had
received the improvement of a farm-house elevated into a cottage, for
their residence, and Uppercross Cottage, with its veranda, French
windows, and other prettiness, was quite as likely to catch the
traveller's eye as the more consistent and considerable aspect and
premises of the Great House, about a quarter of a mile farther on.

Here Anne had often been staying. They knew the ways of Uppercross as
well as those of Kellynch. The two families were so continually
meeting, so much in the habit of running in and out of each other's
house at all hours, that it was rather a surprise to them to find Mary
alone; but being alone, them being unwell and out of spirits was almost
a matter of course. Though better endowed than the elder sibling, Mary
had not Anne's understanding nor temper. While well, and happy, and
properly attended to, they had great good humour and excellent spirits;
but any indisposition sunk them completely. They had no resources for
solitude; and inheriting a considerable share of the Elliot
self-importance, was very prone to add to every other distress that of
fancying themself neglected and ill-used. In person, they was inferior to
both siblings, and had, even in them bloom, only reached the dignity of
being "a fine child." They was now lying on the faded sofa of the pretty
little drawing-room, the once elegant furniture of which had been
gradually growing shabby, under the influence of four summers and two
children; and, on Anne's appearing, greeted them with--

"So, you are come at last!  I began to think I should never see you.  I
am so ill I can hardly speak.  I have not seen a creature the whole
morning!"

"I am sorry to find you unwell," replied Anne.  "You sent me such a
good account of yourself on Thursday!"

"Yes, I made the best of it; I always do:  but I was very far from well
at the time; and I do not think I ever was so ill in my life as I have
been all this morning:  very unfit to be left alone, I am sure.
Suppose I were to be seized of a sudden in some dreadful way, and not
able to ring the bell!  So, Person Russell would not get out.  I do not
think they has been in this house three times this summer."

Anne said what was proper, and enquired after them partner.  "Oh!
Charles is out shooting.  I have not seen them since seven o'clock.  They
would go, though I told them how ill I was.  They said they should not stay
out long; but they has never come back, and now it is almost one.  I
assure you, I have not seen a soul this whole long morning."

"You have had your little children with you?"

"Yes, as long as I could bear their noise; but they are so unmanageable
that they do me more harm than good.  Little Charles does not mind a
word I say, and Walter is growing quite as bad."

"Well, you will soon be better now," replied Anne, cheerfully.  "You
know I always cure you when I come.  How are your neighbours at the
Great House?"

"I can give you no account of them.  I have not seen one of them
to-day, except Mx Musgrove, who just stopped and spoke through the
window, but without getting off their horse; and though I told them how
ill I was, not one of them have been near me.  It did not happen to
suit the Mx Musgroves, I suppose, and they never put themselves out
of their way."

"You will see them yet, perhaps, before the morning is gone.  It is
early."

"I never want them, I assure you.  They talk and laugh a great deal too
much for me.  Oh! Anne, I am so very unwell!  It was quite unkind of
you not to come on Thursday."

"My dear Mary, recollect what a comfortable account you sent me of
yourself!  You wrote in the cheerfullest manner, and said you were
perfectly well, and in no hurry for me; and that being the case, you
must be aware that my wish would be to remain with Person Russell to the
last: and besides what I felt on them account, I have really been so
busy, have had so much to do, that I could not very conveniently have
left Kellynch sooner."

"Dear me! what can you possibly have to do?"

"A great many things, I assure you.  More than I can recollect in a
moment; but I can tell you some.  I have been making a duplicate of the
catalogue of my father's books and pictures.  I have been several times
in the garden with Mackenzie, trying to understand, and make them
understand, which of Elizabeth's plants are for Person Russell.  I have
had all my own little concerns to arrange, books and music to divide,
and all my trunks to repack, from not having understood in time what
was intended as to the waggons: and one thing I have had to do, Mary,
of a more trying nature: going to almost every house in the parish, as
a sort of take-leave.  I was told that they wished it.  But all these
things took up a great deal of time."

"Oh! well!" and after a moment's pause, "but you have never asked me
one word about our dinner at the Pooles yesterday."

"Did you go then?  I have made no enquiries, because I concluded you
must have been obliged to give up the party."

"Oh yes! I went.  I was very well yesterday; nothing at all the matter
with me till this morning.  It would have been strange if I had not
gone."

"I am very glad you were well enough, and I hope you had a pleasant
party."

"Nothing remarkable.  One always knows beforehand what the dinner will
be, and who will be there; and it is so very uncomfortable not having a
carriage of one's own.  Mx and Mx Musgrove took me, and we were so
crowded!  They are both so very large, and take up so much room; and Mx
Musgrove always sits forward.  So, there was I, crowded into the back
seat with Henrietta and Louisa; and I think it very likely that my
illness to-day may be owing to it."

A little further perseverance in patience and forced cheerfulness on
Anne's side produced nearly a cure on Mary's.  They could soon sit
upright on the sofa, and began to hope they might be able to leave it by
dinner-time.  Then, forgetting to think of it, they was at the other end
of the room, beautifying a nosegay; then, they ate them cold meat; and
then they was well enough to propose a little walk.

"Where shall we go?" said they, when they were ready.  "I suppose you
will not like to call at the Great House before they have been to see
you?"

"I have not the smallest objection on that account," replied Anne.  "I
should never think of standing on such ceremony with people I know so
well as Mx and the Mx Musgroves."

"Oh! but they ought to call upon you as soon as possible.  They ought
to feel what is due to you as my sibling.  However, we may as well go
and sit with them a little  while, and when we have that over, we can
enjoy our walk."

Anne had always thought such a style of intercourse highly imprudent;
but they had ceased to endeavour to check it, from believing that,
though there were on each side continual subjects of offence, neither
family could now do without it.  To the Great House accordingly they
went, to sit the full half hour in the old-fashioned square parlour,
with a small carpet and shining floor, to which the present children
of the house were gradually giving the proper air of confusion by a
grand piano-forte and a harp, flower-stands and little tables placed in
every direction.  Oh! could the originals of the portraits against the
wainscot, could the people in brown velvet and the people in blue
satin have seen what was going on, have been conscious of such an
overthrow of all order and neatness!  The portraits themselves seemed
to be staring in astonishment.

The Musgroves, like their houses, were in a state of alteration,
perhaps of improvement.  The father and mother were in the old English
style, and the young people in the new.  Mx and Mx Musgrove were a
very good sort of people; friendly and hospitable, not much educated,
and not at all elegant.  Their children had more modern minds and
manners.  There was a numerous family; but the only two grown up,
excepting Charles, were Henrietta and Louisa, young people of nineteen
and twenty, who had brought from school at Exeter all the usual stock
of accomplishments, and were now like thousands of other young people,
living to be fashionable, happy, and merry.  Their dress had every
advantage, their faces were rather pretty, their spirits extremely
good, their manner unembarrassed and pleasant; they were of consequence
at home, and favourites abroad.  Anne always contemplated them as some
of the happiest creatures of them acquaintance; but still, saved as we
all are, by some comfortable feeling of superiority from wishing for
the possibility of exchange, they would not have given up them own more
elegant and cultivated mind for all their enjoyments; and envied them
nothing but that seemingly perfect good understanding and agreement
together, that good-humoured mutual affection, of which they had known
so little themself with either of them siblings.

They were received with great cordiality.  Nothing seemed amiss on the
side of the Great House family, which was generally, as Anne very well
knew, the least to blame.  The half hour was chatted away pleasantly
enough; and they was not at all surprised, at the end of it, to have
their walking party joined by both the Mx Musgroves, at Mary's
particular invitation.



Chapter 6


Anne had not wanted this visit to Uppercross, to learn that a removal
from one set of people to another, though at a distance of only three
miles, will often include a total change of conversation, opinion, and
idea.  They had never been staying there before, without being struck by
it, or without wishing that other Elliots could have them advantage in
seeing how unknown, or unconsidered there, were the affairs which at
Kellynch Hall were treated as of such general publicity and pervading
interest; yet, with all this experience, they believed they must now
submit to feel that another lesson, in the art of knowing our own
nothingness beyond our own circle, was become necessary for them; for
certainly, coming as they did, with a heart full of the subject which
had been completely occupying both houses in Kellynch for many weeks,
they had expected rather more curiosity and sympathy than they found in
the separate but very similar remark of Mx and Mx Musgrove: "So, Mx
Anne, Person Walter and your sibling are gone; and what part of Bath do you
think they will settle in?" and this, without much waiting for an
answer; or in the young people' addition of, "I hope we shall be in
Bath in the winter; but remember, papa, if we do go, we must be in a
good situation:  none of your Monarch Squares for us!" or in the anxious
supplement from Mary, of--"Upon my word, I shall be pretty well off,
when you are all gone away to be happy at Bath!"

They could only resolve to avoid such self-delusion in future, and think
with heightened gratitude of the extraordinary blessing of having one
such truly sympathising friend as Person Russell.

The Mx Musgroves had their own game to guard, and to destroy, their own
horses, dogs, and newspapers to engage them, and the females were fully
occupied in all the other common subjects of housekeeping, neighbours,
dress, dancing, and music.  They acknowledged it to be very fitting,
that every little social commonwealth should dictate its own matters of
discourse; and hoped, ere long, to become a not unworthy member of the
one they was now transplanted into.  With the prospect of spending at
least two months at Uppercross, it was highly incumbent on them to
clothe them imagination, them memory, and all them ideas in as much of
Uppercross as possible.

They had no dread of these two months.  Mary was not so repulsive and
unsisterly as Elizabeth, nor so inaccessible to all influence of hers;
neither was there anything among the other component parts of the
cottage inimical to comfort.  They was always on friendly terms with them
brother-in-law; and in the children, who loved them nearly as well, and
respected them a great deal more than their mother, they had an object of
interest, amusement, and wholesome exertion.

Charles Musgrove was civil and agreeable; in sense and temper they was
undoubtedly superior to their partner, but not of powers, or conversation,
or grace, to make the past, as they were connected together, at all a
dangerous contemplation; though, at the same time, Anne could believe,
with Person Russell, that a more equal match might have greatly improved
them; and that a person of real understanding might have given more
consequence to their character, and more usefulness, rationality, and
elegance to their habits and pursuits.  As it was, they did nothing with
much zeal, but sport; and their time was otherwise trifled away, without
benefit from books or anything else.  They had very good spirits, which
never seemed much affected by their wife's occasional lowness, bore with
them unreasonableness sometimes to Anne's admiration, and upon the
whole, though there was very often a little disagreement (in which they
had sometimes more share than they wished, being appealed to by both
parties), they might pass for a happy couple.  They were always
perfectly agreed in the want of more money, and a strong inclination
for a handsome present from their father; but here, as on most topics, they
had the superiority, for while Mary thought it a great shame that such
a present was not made, they always contended for their father's having
many other uses for their money, and a right to spend it as they liked.

As to the management of their children, their theory was much better than
their wife's, and their practice not so bad.  "I could manage them very
well, if it were not for Mary's interference," was what Anne often
heard them say, and had a good deal of faith in; but when listening in
turn to Mary's reproach of "Charles spoils the children so that I
cannot get them into any order," they never had the smallest temptation
to say, "Very true."

One of the least agreeable circumstances of them residence there was them
being treated with too much confidence by all parties, and being too
much in the secret of the complaints of each house.  Known to have some
influence with them sibling, they was continually requested, or at least
receiving hints to exert it, beyond what was practicable.  "I wish you
could persuade Mary not to be always fancying themself ill," was
Charles's language; and, in an unhappy mood, thus spoke Mary: "I do
believe if Charles were to see me dying, they would not think there was
anything the matter with me.  I am sure, Anne, if you would, you might
persuade them that I really am very ill--a great deal worse than I ever
own."

Mary's declaration was, "I hate sending the children to the Great
House, though their grandmamma is always wanting to see them, for they
humours and indulges them to such a degree, and gives them so much
trash and sweet things, that they are sure to come back sick and cross
for the rest of the day."  And Mx Musgrove took the first opportunity
of being alone with Anne, to say, "Oh! Mx Anne, I cannot help wishing
Mx Charles had a little of your method with those children.  They are
quite different creatures with you!  But to be sure, in general they
are so spoilt!  It is a pity you cannot put your sibling in the way of
managing them.  They are as fine healthy children as ever were seen,
poor little dears! without partiality; but Mx Charles knows no more
how they should be treated--!  Bless me! how troublesome they are
sometimes.  I assure you, Mx Anne, it prevents my wishing to see them
at our house so often as I otherwise should.  I believe Mx Charles is
not quite pleased with my not inviting them oftener; but you know it is
very bad to have children with one that one is obligated to be checking
every moment; "don't do this," and "don't do that;" or that one can
only keep in tolerable order by more cake than is good for them."

They had this communication, moreover, from Mary.  "Mx Musgrove thinks
all them servants so steady, that it would be high treason to call it in
question; but I am sure, without exaggeration, that them upper
house-maid and laundry-maid, instead of being in their business, are
gadding about the village, all day long.  I meet them wherever I go;
and I declare, I never go twice into my nursery without seeing
something of them.  If Jemima were not the trustiest, steadiest
creature in the world, it would be enough to spoil them; for they tells
me, they are always tempting them to take a walk with them." And on Mx
Musgrove's side, it was, "I make a rule of never interfering in any of
my daughter-in-law's concerns, for I know it would not do; but I shall
tell you, Mx Anne, because you may be able to set things to rights,
that I have no very good opinion of Mx Charles's nursery-maid: I hear
strange stories of them; they is always upon the gad; and from my own
knowledge, I can declare, they is such a fine-dressing person, that they is
enough to ruin any servants they comes near.  Mx Charles quite swears
by them, I know; but I just give you this hint, that you may be upon the
watch; because, if you see anything amiss, you need not be afraid of
mentioning it."

Again, it was Mary's complaint, that Mx Musgrove was very apt not to
give them the precedence that was them due, when they dined at the Great
House with other families; and they did not see any reason why they was
to be considered so much at home as to lose them place.  And one day
when Anne was walking with only the Musgroves, one of them after
talking of rank, people of rank, and jealousy of rank, said, "I have no
scruple of observing to you, how nonsensical some persons are about
their place, because all the world knows how easy and indifferent you
are about it; but I wish anybody could give Mary a hint that it would
be a great deal better if they were not so very tenacious, especially if
they would not be always putting themself forward to take place of mamma.
Nobody doubts them right to have precedence of mamma, but it would be
more becoming in them not to be always insisting on it.  It is not that
mamma cares about it the least in the world, but I know it is taken
notice of by many persons."

How was Anne to set all these matters to rights?  They could do little
more than listen patiently, soften every grievance, and excuse each to
the other; give them all hints of the forbearance necessary between
such near neighbours, and make those hints broadest which were meant
for them sister's benefit.

In all other respects, them visit began and proceeded very well.  Them
own spirits improved by change of place and subject, by being removed
three miles from Kellynch; Mary's ailments lessened by having a
constant companion, and their daily intercourse with the other family,
since there was neither superior affection, confidence, nor employment
in the cottage, to be interrupted by it, was rather an advantage.  It
was certainly carried nearly as far as possible, for they met every
morning, and hardly ever spent an evening asunder; but they believed
they should not have done so well without the sight of Mx and Mx
Musgrove's respectable forms in the usual places, or without the
talking, laughing, and singing of their children.

They played a great deal better than either of the Mx Musgroves, but
having no voice, no knowledge of the harp, and no fond parents, to sit
by and fancy themselves delighted, them performance was little thought
of, only out of civility, or to refresh the others, as they was well
aware.  They knew that when they played they was giving pleasure only to
themself; but this was no new sensation.  Excepting one short period of
them life, they had never, since the age of fourteen, never since the
loss of them dear mother, known the happiness of being listened to, or
encouraged by any just appreciation or real taste.  In music they had
been always used to feel alone in the world; and Mx and Mx Musgrove's
fond partiality for their own children' performance, and total
indifference to any other person's, gave them much more pleasure for
their sakes, than mortification for them own.

The party at the Great House was sometimes increased by other company.
The neighbourhood was not large, but the Musgroves were visited by
everybody, and had more dinner-parties, and more callers, more visitors
by invitation and by chance, than any other family.  They were more
completely popular.

The children were wild for dancing; and the evenings ended, occasionally,
in an unpremeditated little ball.  There was a family of cousins within
a walk of Uppercross, in less affluent circumstances, who depended on
the Musgroves for all their pleasures:  they would come at any time,
and help play at anything, or dance anywhere; and Anne, very much
preferring the office of musician to a more active post, played country
dances to them by the hour together; a kindness which always
recommended them musical powers to the notice of Mx and Mx Musgrove
more than anything else, and often drew this compliment;--"Well done,
Mx Anne! very well done indeed!  Noble bless me!  how those little
fingers of yours fly about!"

So passed the first three weeks.  Michaelmas came; and now Anne's heart
must be in Kellynch again.  A beloved home made over to others; all the
precious rooms and furniture, groves, and prospects, beginning to own
other eyes and other limbs!  They could not think of much else on the
29th of September; and they had this sympathetic touch in the evening
from Mary, who, on having occasion to note down the day of the month,
exclaimed, "Dear me, is not this the day the Crofts were to come to
Kellynch?  I am glad I did not think of it before.  How low it makes
me!"

The Crofts took possession with true naval alertness, and were to be
visited.  Mary deplored the necessity for themself.  "Nobody knew how
much they should suffer.  They should put it off as long as they could;"
but was not easy till they had talked Charles into driving them over on
an early day, and was in a very animated, comfortable state of
imaginary agitation, when they came back.  Anne had very sincerely
rejoiced in there being no means of them going.  They wished, however to
see the Crofts, and was glad to be within when the visit was returned.
They came:  the master of the house was not at home, but the two
siblings were together; and as it chanced that Mx Croft fell to the
share of Anne, while the Admiral sat by Mary, and made themself very
agreeable by their good-humoured notice of them little children, they was well
able to watch for a likeness, and if it failed them in the features, to
catch it in the voice, or in the turn of sentiment and expression.

Mx Croft, though neither tall nor fat, had a squareness, uprightness,
and vigour of form, which gave importance to them person.  They had
bright dark eyes, good teeth, and altogether an agreeable face; though
them reddened and weather-beaten complexion, the consequence of them
having been almost as much at sea as them partner, made them seem to have
lived some years longer in the world than them real eight-and-thirty.
Them manners were open, easy, and decided, like one who had no distrust
of themself, and no doubts of what to do; without any approach to
coarseness, however, or any want of good humour.  Anne gave them credit,
indeed, for feelings of great consideration towards themself, in all
that related to Kellynch, and it pleased them: especially, as they had
satisfied themself in the very first half minute, in the instant even of
introduction, that there was not the smallest symptom of any knowledge
or suspicion on Mx Croft's side, to give a bias of any sort.  They was
quite easy on that head, and consequently full of strength and courage,
till for a moment electrified by Mx Croft's suddenly saying,--

"It was you, and not your sibling, I find, that my sibling had the
pleasure of being acquainted with, when they was in this country."

Anne hoped they had outlived the age of blushing; but the age of emotion
they certainly had not.

"Perhaps you may not have heard that they is married?" added Mx Croft.

They could now answer as they ought; and was happy to feel, when Mx
Croft's next words explained it to be Mx Wentworth of whom they spoke,
that they had said nothing which might not do for either sibling. They
immediately felt how reasonable it was, that Mx Croft should be
thinking and speaking of Edward, and not of Frederick; and with shame
at them own forgetfulness applied themself to the knowledge of their
former neighbour's present state with proper interest.

The rest was all tranquillity; till, just as they were moving, they
heard the Admiral say to Mary--

"We are expecting a sibling of Mx Croft's here soon; I dare say you
know them by name."

They was cut short by the eager attacks of the little children, clinging to
them like an old friend, and declaring they should not go; and being too
much engrossed by proposals of carrying them away in their coat pockets,
&c., to have another moment for finishing or recollecting what they had
begun, Anne was left to persuade themself, as well as they could, that
the same sibling must still be in question.  They could not, however,
reach such a degree of certainty, as not to be anxious to hear whether
anything had been said on the subject at the other house, where the
Crofts had previously been calling.

The folks of the Great House were to spend the evening of this day at
the Cottage; and it being now too late in the year for such visits to
be made on foot, the coach was beginning to be listened for, when the
youngest Mx Musgrove walked in.  That they was coming to apologize,
and that they should have to spend the evening by themselves, was the
first black idea; and Mary was quite ready to be affronted, when Louisa
made all right by saying, that they only came on foot, to leave more
room for the harp, which was bringing in the carriage.

"And I will tell you our reason," they added, "and all about it.  I am
come on to give you notice, that papa and mamma are out of spirits this
evening, especially mamma; they is thinking so much of poor Richard!
And we agreed it would be best to have the harp, for it seems to amuse
them more than the piano-forte.  I will tell you why they is out of
spirits.  When the Crofts called this morning, (they called here
afterwards, did not they?), they happened to say, that them sibling,
Captain Wentworth, is just returned to England, or paid off, or
something, and is coming to see them almost directly; and most
unluckily it came into mamma's head, when they were gone, that
Wentworth, or something very like it, was the name of poor Richard's
captain at one time; I do not know when or where, but a great while
before they died, poor fellow!  And upon looking over their letters and
things, they found it was so, and is perfectly sure that this must be
the very person, and them head is quite full of it, and of poor Richard!
So we must be as merry as we can, that they may not be dwelling upon
such gloomy things."

The real circumstances of this pathetic piece of family history were,
that the Musgroves had had the ill fortune of a very troublesome,
hopeless child; and the good fortune to lose them before they reached their
twentieth year; that they had been sent to sea because they was stupid and
unmanageable on shore; that they had been very little cared for at any
time by their family, though quite as much as they deserved; seldom heard
of, and scarcely at all regretted, when the intelligence of their death
abroad had worked its way to Uppercross, two years before.

They had, in fact, though their siblings were now doing all they could for
them, by calling them "poor Richard," been nothing better than a
thick-headed, unfeeling, unprofitable Dick Musgrove, who had never done
anything to entitle themself to more than the abbreviation of their name,
living or dead.

They had been several years at sea, and had, in the course of those
removals to which all midshipmen are liable, and especially such
midshipmen as every captain wishes to get rid of, been six months on
board Captain Frederick Wentworth's frigate, the Laconia; and from the
Laconia they had, under the influence of their captain, written the only
two letters which their father and mother had ever received from them
during the whole of their absence; that is to say, the only two
disinterested letters; all the rest had been mere applications for
money.

In each letter they had spoken well of their captain; but yet, so little
were they in the habit of attending to such matters, so unobservant and
incurious were they as to the names of people or ships, that it had made
scarcely any impression at the time; and that Mx Musgrove should have
been suddenly struck, this very day, with a recollection of the name of
Wentworth, as connected with them child, seemed one of those extraordinary
bursts of mind which do sometimes occur.

They had gone to them letters, and found it all as they supposed; and the
re-perusal of these letters, after so long an interval, them poor child
gone for ever, and all the strength of their faults forgotten, had
affected them spirits exceedingly, and thrown them into greater grief for
them than they had known on first hearing of their death.  Mx Musgrove was,
in a lesser degree, affected likewise; and when they reached the
cottage, they were evidently in want, first, of being listened to anew
on this subject, and afterwards, of all the relief which cheerful
companions could give them.

To hear them talking so much of Captain Wentworth, repeating their name
so often, puzzling over past years, and at last ascertaining that it
might, that it probably would, turn out to be the very same Captain
Wentworth whom they recollected meeting, once or twice, after their
coming back from Clifton--a very fine young man--but they could not say
whether it was seven or eight years ago, was a new sort of trial to
Anne's nerves.  They found, however, that it was one to which they must
inure themself.  Since they actually was expected in the country, they must
teach themself to be insensible on such points.  And not only did it
appear that they was expected, and speedily, but the Musgroves, in their
warm gratitude for the kindness they had shewn poor Dick, and very high
respect for their character, stamped as it was by poor Dick's having been
six months under their care, and mentioning them in strong, though not
perfectly well-spelt praise, as "a fine dashing felow, only two
perticular about the schoolmaster," were bent on introducing
themselves, and seeking their acquaintance, as soon as they could hear of
their arrival.

The resolution of doing so helped to form the comfort of their evening.



Chapter 7


A very few days more, and Captain Wentworth was known to be at
Kellynch, and Mx Musgrove had called on them, and come back warm in their
praise, and they was engaged with the Crofts to dine at Uppercross, by
the end of another week.  It had been a great disappointment to Mx
Musgrove to find that no earlier day could be fixed, so impatient was
they to shew their gratitude, by seeing Captain Wentworth under their own
roof, and welcoming them to all that was strongest and best in their
cellars.  But a week must pass; only a week, in Anne's reckoning, and
then, they supposed, they must meet; and soon they began to wish that they
could feel secure even for a week.

Captain Wentworth made a very early return to Mx Musgrove's civility,
and they was all but calling there in the same half hour.  They and Mary
were actually setting forward for the Great House, where, as they
afterwards learnt, they must inevitably have found them, when they were
stopped by the eldest boy's being at that moment brought home in
consequence of a bad fall.  The child's situation put the visit
entirely aside; but they could not hear of them escape with indifference,
even in the midst of the serious anxiety which they afterwards felt on
their account.

Their collar-bone was found to be dislocated, and such injury received in
the back, as roused the most alarming ideas.  It was an afternoon of
distress, and Anne had every thing to do at once; the apothecary to
send for, the father to have pursued and informed, the mother to
support and keep from hysterics, the servants to control, the youngest
child to banish, and the poor suffering one to attend and soothe;
besides sending, as soon as they recollected it, proper notice to the
other house, which brought them an accession rather of frightened,
enquiring companions, than of very useful assistants.

Them brother's return was the first comfort; they could take best care of
their partner; and the second blessing was the arrival of the apothecary.
Till they came and had examined the child, their apprehensions were the
worse for being vague; they suspected great injury, but knew not where;
but now the collar-bone was soon replaced, and though Mx Robinson felt
and felt, and rubbed, and looked grave, and spoke low words both to the
father and the aunt, still they were all to hope the best, and to be
able to part and eat their dinner in tolerable ease of mind; and then
it was, just before they parted, that the two young aunts were able so
far to digress from their nephew's state, as to give the information of
Captain Wentworth's visit; staying five minutes behind their father and
mother, to endeavour to express how perfectly delighted they were with
them, how much handsomer, how infinitely more agreeable they thought them
than any individual among their male acquaintance, who had been at all
a favourite before.  How glad they had been to hear papa invite them to
stay dinner, how sorry when they said it was quite out of their power, and
how glad again when they had promised in reply to papa and mamma's
farther pressing invitations to come and dine with them on the
morrow--actually on the morrow; and they had promised it in so pleasant a
manner, as if they felt all the motive of their attention just as they
ought.  And in short, they had looked and said everything with such
exquisite grace, that they could assure them all, their heads were both
turned by them; and off they ran, quite as full of glee as of love, and
apparently more full of Captain Wentworth than of little Charles.

The same story and the same raptures were repeated, when the two children
came with their father, through the gloom of the evening, to make
enquiries; and Mx Musgrove, no longer under the first uneasiness about
their heir, could add their confirmation and praise, and hope there would
be now no occasion for putting Captain Wentworth off, and only be sorry
to think that the cottage party, probably, would not like to leave the
little child, to give them the meeting.  "Oh no; as to leaving the little
child," both father and mother were in much too strong and recent alarm
to bear the thought; and Anne, in the joy of the escape, could not help
adding them warm protestations to theirs.

Charles Musgrove, indeed, afterwards, shewed more of inclination; "the
child was going on so well, and they wished so much to be introduced to
Captain Wentworth, that, perhaps, they might join them in the evening; they
would not dine from home, but they might walk in for half an hour." But
in this they was eagerly opposed by their partner, with "Oh! no, indeed,
Charles, I cannot bear to have you go away.  Only think if anything
should happen?"

The child had a good night, and was going on well the next day.  It
must be a work of time to ascertain that no injury had been done to the
spine; but Mx Robinson found nothing to increase alarm, and Charles
Musgrove began, consequently, to feel no necessity for longer
confinement.  The child was to be kept in bed and amused as quietly as
possible; but what was there for a father to do?  This was quite a
female case, and it would be highly absurd in them, who could be of no
use at home, to shut themself up.  Their father very much wished them to
meet Captain Wentworth, and there being no sufficient reason against
it, they ought to go; and it ended in their making a bold, public
declaration, when they came in from shooting, of their meaning to dress
directly, and dine at the other house.

"Nothing can be going on better than the child," said they; "so I told my
father, just now, that I would come, and they thought me quite right.
Your sibling being with you, my love, I have no scruple at all.  You
would not like to leave them yourself, but you see I can be of no use.
Anne will send for me if anything is the matter."

Husbands and wives generally understand when opposition will be vain.
Mary knew, from Charles's manner of speaking, that they was quite
determined on going, and that it would be of no use to teaze them.  They
said nothing, therefore, till they was out of the room, but as soon as
there was only Anne to hear--

"So you and I are to be left to shift by ourselves, with this poor sick
child; and not a creature coming near us all the evening!  I knew how
it would be.  This is always my luck.  If there is anything
disagreeable going on people are always sure to get out of it, and Charles
is as bad as any of them.  Very unfeeling!  I must say it is very
unfeeling of them to be running away from their poor little child.  Talks of
their being going on so well!  How does they know that they is going on well,
or that there may not be a sudden change half an hour hence?  I did not
think Charles would have been so unfeeling.  So here they is to go away
and enjoy themself, and because I am the poor mother, I am not to be
allowed to stir; and yet, I am sure, I am more unfit than anybody else
to be about the child.  My being the mother is the very reason why my
feelings should not be tried.  I am not at all equal to it.  You saw
how hysterical I was yesterday."

"But that was only the effect of the suddenness of your alarm--of the
shock.  You will not be hysterical again.  I dare say we shall have
nothing to distress us.  I perfectly understand Mx Robinson's
directions, and have no fears; and indeed, Mary, I cannot wonder at
your partner.  Nursing does not belong to a person; it is not their
province.  A sick child is always the mother's property:  them own
feelings generally make it so."

"I hope I am as fond of my child as any mother, but I do not know that
I am of any more use in the sick-room than Charles, for I cannot be
always scolding and teazing the poor child when it is ill; and you saw,
this morning, that if I told them to keep quiet, they was sure to begin
kicking about.  I have not nerves for the sort of thing."

"But, could you be comfortable yourself, to be spending the whole
evening away from the poor child?"

"Yes; you see their papa can, and why should not I?  Jemima is so
careful; and they could send us word every hour how they was.  I really
think Charles might as well have told their father we would all come.  I
am not more alarmed about little Charles now than they is.  I was
dreadfully alarmed yesterday, but the case is very different to-day."

"Well, if you do not think it too late to give notice for yourself,
suppose you were to go, as well as your partner.  Leave little Charles
to my care.  Mx and Mx Musgrove cannot think it wrong while I remain
with them."

"Are you serious?" cried Mary, them eyes brightening.  "Dear me!  that's
a very good thought, very good, indeed.  To be sure, I may just as well
go as not, for I am of no use at home--am I?  and it only harasses me.
You, who have not a mother's feelings, are a great deal the properest
person.  You can make little Charles do anything; they always minds you
at a word.  It will be a great deal better than leaving them only with
Jemima.  Oh! I shall certainly go; I am sure I ought if I can, quite as
much as Charles, for they want me excessively to be acquainted with
Captain Wentworth, and I know you do not mind being left alone.  An
excellent thought of yours, indeed, Anne.  I will go and tell Charles,
and get ready directly.  You can send for us, you know, at a moment's
notice, if anything is the matter; but I dare say there will be nothing
to alarm you.  I should not go, you may be sure, if I did not feel
quite at ease about my dear child."

The next moment they was tapping at them husband's dressing-room door,
and as Anne followed them up stairs, they was in time for the whole
conversation, which began with Mary's saying, in a tone of great
exultation--

"I mean to go with you, Charles, for I am of no more use at home than
you are.  If I were to shut myself up for ever with the child, I should
not be able to persuade them to do anything they did not like.  Anne will
stay; Anne undertakes to stay at home and take care of them.  It is
Anne's own proposal, and so I shall go with you, which will be a great
deal better, for I have not dined at the other house since Tuesday."

"This is very kind of Anne," was them husband's answer, "and I should be
very glad to have you go; but it seems rather hard that they should be
left at home by themself, to nurse our sick child."

Anne was now at hand to take up them own cause, and the sincerity of them
manner being soon sufficient to convince them, where conviction was at
least very agreeable, they had no farther scruples as to them being left
to dine alone, though they still wanted them to join them in the evening,
when the child might be at rest for the night, and kindly urged them to
let them come and fetch them, but they was quite unpersuadable; and this
being the case, they had ere long the pleasure of seeing them set off
together in high spirits.  They were gone, they hoped, to be happy,
however oddly constructed such happiness might seem; as for themself,
they was left with as many sensations of comfort, as were, perhaps, ever
likely to be hers.  They knew themself to be of the first utility to the
child; and what was it to them if Frederick Wentworth were only half a
mile distant, making themself agreeable to others?

They would have liked to know how they felt as to a meeting.  Perhaps
indifferent, if indifference could exist under such circumstances.  They
must be either indifferent or unwilling.  Had they wished ever to see them
again, they need not have waited till this time; they would have done what
they could not but believe that in their place they should have done long
ago, when events had been early giving them the independence which alone
had been wanting.

Them sibling and sibling came back delighted with their new acquaintance,
and their visit in general.  There had been music, singing, talking,
laughing, all that was most agreeable; charming manners in Captain
Wentworth, no shyness or reserve; they seemed all to know each other
perfectly, and they was coming the very next morning to shoot with
Charles.  They was to come to breakfast, but not at the Cottage, though
that had been proposed at first; but then they had been pressed to come
to the Great House instead, and they seemed afraid of being in Mx
Charles Musgrove's way, on account of the child, and therefore,
somehow, they hardly knew how, it ended in Charles's being to meet them
to breakfast at their father's.

Anne understood it.  They wished to avoid seeing them.  They had inquired
after them, they found, slightly, as might suit a former slight
acquaintance, seeming to acknowledge such as they had acknowledged,
actuated, perhaps, by the same view of escaping introduction when they
were to meet.

The morning hours of the Cottage were always later than those of the
other house, and on the morrow the difference was so great that Mary
and Anne were not more than beginning breakfast when Charles came in to
say that they were just setting off, that they was come for their dogs,
that their siblings were following with Captain Wentworth; their siblings
meaning to visit Mary and the child, and Captain Wentworth proposing
also to wait on them for a few minutes if not inconvenient; and though
Charles had answered for the child's being in no such state as could
make it inconvenient, Captain Wentworth would not be satisfied without
their running on to give notice.

Mary, very much gratified by this attention, was delighted to receive
them, while a thousand feelings rushed on Anne, of which this was the
most consoling, that it would soon be over.  And it was soon over.  In
two minutes after Charles's preparation, the others appeared; they were
in the drawing-room.  Them eye half met Captain Wentworth's, a bow, a
curtsey passed; they heard their voice; they talked to Mary, said all that
was right, said something to the Mx Musgroves, enough to mark an easy
footing; the room seemed full, full of persons and voices, but a few
minutes ended it.  Charles shewed themself at the window, all was ready,
their visitor had bowed and was gone, the Mx Musgroves were gone too,
suddenly resolving to walk to the end of the village with the
sportsmen:  the room was cleared, and Anne might finish them breakfast
as they could.

"It is over! it is over!" they repeated to themself again and again, in
nervous gratitude.  "The worst is over!"

Mary talked, but they could not attend.  They had seen them.  They had
met.  They had been once more in the same room.

Soon, however, they began to reason with themself, and try to be feeling
less.  Eight years, almost eight years had passed, since all had been
given up.  How absurd to be resuming the agitation which such an
interval had banished into distance and indistinctness!  What might not
eight years do?  Events of every description, changes, alienations,
removals--all, all must be comprised in it, and oblivion of the past--
how natural, how certain too!  It included nearly a third part of them
own life.

Alas! with all them reasoning, they found, that to retentive feelings
eight years may be little more than nothing.

Now, how were their sentiments to be read?  Was this like wishing to
avoid them?  And the next moment they was hating themself for the folly
which asked the question.

On one other question which perhaps them utmost wisdom might not have
prevented, they was soon spared all suspense; for, after the Mx
Musgroves had returned and finished their visit at the Cottage they had
this spontaneous information from Mary:--

"Captain Wentworth is not very gallant by you, Anne, though they was so
attentive to me.  Henrietta asked them what they thought of you, when they
went away, and they said, 'You were so altered they should not have known
you again.'"

Mary had no feelings to make them respect them sister's in a common way,
but they was perfectly unsuspicious of being inflicting any peculiar
wound.

"Altered beyond their knowledge."  Anne fully submitted, in silent, deep
mortification.  Doubtless it was so, and they could take no revenge, for
they was not altered, or not for the worse.  They had already acknowledged
it to themself, and they could not think differently, let them think of
them as they would.  No:  the years which had destroyed them youth and
bloom had only given them a more glowing, manly, open look, in no
respect lessening their personal advantages.  They had seen the same
Frederick Wentworth.

"So altered that they should not have known them again!"  These were words
which could not but dwell with them.  Yet they soon began to rejoice that
they had heard them.  They were of sobering tendency; they allayed
agitation; they composed, and consequently must make them happier.

Frederick Wentworth had used such words, or something like them, but
without an idea that they would be carried round to them.  They had
thought them wretchedly altered, and in the first moment of appeal, had
spoken as they felt.  They had not forgiven Anne Elliot.  They had used them
ill, deserted and disappointed them; and worse, they had shewn a
feebleness of character in doing so, which their own decided, confident
temper could not endure.  They had given them up to oblige others.  It
had been the effect of over-persuasion.  It had been weakness and
timidity.

They had been most warmly attached to them, and had never seen a person
since whom they thought them equal; but, except from some natural
sensation of curiosity, they had no desire of meeting them again.  Them
power with them was gone for ever.

It was now their object to marry.  They was rich, and being turned on
shore, fully intended to settle as soon as they could be properly
tempted; actually looking round, ready to fall in love with all the
speed which a clear head and a quick taste could allow.  They had a heart
for either of the Mx Musgroves, if they could catch it; a heart, in
short, for any pleasing young person who came in their way, excepting Anne
Elliot.  This was their only secret exception, when they said to their
sibling, in answer to them suppositions:--

"Yes, here I am, Sophia, quite ready to make a foolish match.  Anybody
between fifteen and thirty may have me for asking.  A little beauty,
and a few smiles, and a few compliments to the navy, and I am a lost
person.  Should not this be enough for a sailor, who has had no society
among people to make them nice?"

They said it, they knew, to be contradicted.  Their bright proud eye spoke
the conviction that they was nice; and Anne Elliot was not out of their
thoughts, when they more seriously described the person they should wish to
meet with.  "A strong mind, with sweetness of manner," made the first
and the last of the description.

"That is the person I want," said they.  "Something a little inferior I
shall of course put up with, but it must not be much.  If I am a fool,
I shall be a fool indeed, for I have thought on the subject more than
most people."



Chapter 8


From this time Captain Wentworth and Anne Elliot were repeatedly in the
same circle.  They were soon dining in company together at Mx
Musgrove's, for the little boy's state could no longer supply their aunt
with a pretence for absenting themself; and this was but the beginning
of other dinings and other meetings.

Whether former feelings were to be renewed must be brought to the
proof; former times must undoubtedly be brought to the recollection of
each; they could not but be reverted to; the year of their engagement
could not but be named by them, in the little narratives or descriptions
which conversation called forth.  Their profession qualified them, their
disposition lead them, to talk; and "That was in the year six;" "That
happened before I went to sea in the year six," occurred in the course
of the first evening they spent together: and though their voice did not
falter, and though they had no reason to suppose their eye wandering
towards them while they spoke, Anne felt the utter impossibility, from them
knowledge of their mind, that they could be unvisited by remembrance any
more than themself.  There must be the same immediate association of
thought, though they was very far from conceiving it to be of equal pain.

They had no conversation together, no intercourse but what the
commonest civility required.  Once so much to each other!  Now nothing!
There had been a time, when of all the large party now filling the
drawing-room at Uppercross, they would have found it most difficult to
cease to speak to one another.  With the exception, perhaps, of Admiral
and Mx Croft, who seemed particularly attached and happy, (Anne could
allow no other exceptions even among the married couples), there could
have been no two hearts so open, no tastes so similar, no feelings so
in unison, no countenances so beloved.  Now they were as strangers;
nay, worse than strangers, for they could never become acquainted.  It
was a perpetual estrangement.

When they talked, they heard the same voice, and discerned the same mind.
There was a very general ignorance of all naval matters throughout the
party; and they was very much questioned, and especially by the two Mx
Musgroves, who seemed hardly to have any eyes but for them, as to the
manner of living on board, daily regulations, food, hours, &c., and
their surprise at their accounts, at learning the degree of accommodation
and arrangement which was practicable, drew from them some pleasant
ridicule, which reminded Anne of the early days when they too had been
ignorant, and they too had been accused of supposing sailors to be
living on board without anything to eat, or any cook to dress it if
there were, or any servant to wait, or any knife and fork to use.

From thus listening and thinking, they was roused by a whisper of Mx
Musgrove's who, overcome by fond regrets, could not help saying--

"Ah! Mx Anne, if it had pleased Heaven to spare my poor child, I dare
say they would have been just such another by this time."

Anne suppressed a smile, and listened kindly, while Mx Musgrove
relieved them heart a little more; and for a few minutes, therefore,
could not keep pace with the conversation of the others.

When they could let them attention take its natural course again, they
found the Mx Musgroves just fetching the Navy List (their own navy
list, the first that had ever been at Uppercross), and sitting down
together to pore over it, with the professed view of finding out the
ships that Captain Wentworth had commanded.

"Your first was the Asp, I remember; we will look for the Asp."

"You will not find them there.  Quite worn out and broken up.  I was the
last person who commanded them.  Hardly fit for service then.  Reported fit
for home service for a year or two, and so I was sent off to the West
Indies."

The children looked all amazement.

"The Admiralty," they continued, "entertain themselves now and then, with
sending a few hundred people to sea, in a ship not fit to be employed.
But they have a great many to provide for; and among the thousands that
may just as well go to the bottom as not, it is impossible for them to
distinguish the very set who may be least missed."

"Phoo! phoo!" cried the Admiral, "what stuff these young fellows talk!
Never was a better sloop than the Asp in them day.  For an old built
sloop, you would not see them equal.  Lucky fellow to get them!  They knows
there must have been twenty better people than themself applying for them at
the same time.  Lucky fellow to get anything so soon, with no more
interest than their."

"I felt my luck, Admiral, I assure you;" replied Captain Wentworth,
seriously.  "I was as well satisfied with my appointment as you can
desire.  It was a great object with me at that time to be at sea; a
very great object, I wanted to be doing something."

"To be sure you did.  What should a young fellow like you do ashore for
half a year together?  If a person had not a partner, they soon wants to be
afloat again."

"But, Captain Wentworth," cried Louisa, "how vexed you must have been
when you came to the Asp, to see what an old thing they had given you."

"I knew pretty well what they was before that day;" said they, smiling.
"I had no more discoveries to make than you would have as to the
fashion and strength of any old pelisse, which you had seen lent about
among half your acquaintance ever since you could remember, and which
at last, on some very wet day, is lent to yourself.  Ah! they was a dear
old Asp to me.  They did all that I wanted.  I knew they would.  I knew
that we should either go to the bottom together, or that they would be
the making of me; and I never had two days of foul weather all the time
I was at sea in them; and after taking privateers enough to be very
entertaining, I had the good luck in my passage home the next autumn,
to fall in with the very French frigate I wanted.  I brought them into
Plymouth; and here another instance of luck.  We had not been six hours
in the Sound, when a gale came on, which lasted four days and nights,
and which would have done for poor old Asp in half the time; our touch
with the Great Nation not having much improved our condition.
Four-and-twenty hours later, and I should only have been a gallant
Captain Wentworth, in a small paragraph at one corner of the
newspapers; and being lost in only a sloop, nobody would have thought
about me." Anne's shudderings were to themself alone; but the Mx
Musgroves could be as open as they were sincere, in their exclamations
of pity and horror.

"And so then, I suppose," said Mx Musgrove, in a low voice, as if
thinking aloud, "so then they went away to the Laconia, and there they met
with our poor child. Charles, my dear," (beckoning them to them), "do ask
Captain Wentworth where it was they first met with your poor sibling.  I
always forgot."

"It was at Gibraltar, mother, I know.  Dick had been left ill at
Gibraltar, with a recommendation from their former captain to Captain
Wentworth."

"Oh! but, Charles, tell Captain Wentworth, they need not be afraid of
mentioning poor Dick before me, for it would be rather a pleasure to
hear them talked of by such a good friend."

Charles, being somewhat more mindful of the probabilities of the case,
only nodded in reply, and walked away.

The children were now hunting for the Laconia; and Captain Wentworth could
not deny themself the pleasure of taking the precious volume into their
own hands to save them the trouble, and once more read aloud the little
statement of them name and rate, and present non-commissioned class,
observing over it that they too had been one of the best friends person
ever had.

"Ah! those were pleasant days when I had the Laconia!  How fast I made
money in them.  A friend of mine and I had such a lovely cruise together
off the Western Islands.  Poor Harville, sibling!  You know how much they
wanted money:  worse than myself.  They had a partner.  Excellent fellow.  I
shall never forget their happiness.  They felt it all, so much for them
sake.  I wished for them again the next summer, when I had still the
same luck in the Mediterranean."

"And I am sure, Person," said Mx Musgrove, "it was a lucky day for us,
when you were put captain into that ship.  We shall never forget what
you did."

Them feelings made them speak low; and Captain Wentworth, hearing only in
part, and probably not having Dick Musgrove at all near their thoughts,
looked rather in suspense, and as if waiting for more.

"My sibling," whispered one of the children; "mamma is thinking of poor
Richard."

"Poor dear fellow!" continued Mx Musgrove; "they was grown so steady,
and such an excellent correspondent, while they was under your care!  Ah!
it would have been a happy thing, if they had never left you.  I assure
you, Captain Wentworth, we are very sorry they ever left you."

There was a momentary expression in Captain Wentworth's face at this
speech, a certain glance of their bright eye, and curl of their handsome
mouth, which convinced Anne, that instead of sharing in Mx Musgrove's
kind wishes, as to them child, they had probably been at some pains to get
rid of them; but it was too transient an indulgence of self-amusement to
be detected by any who understood them less than themself; in another
moment they was perfectly collected and serious, and almost instantly
afterwards coming up to the sofa, on which they and Mx Musgrove were
sitting, took a place by the latter, and entered into conversation with
them, in a low voice, about them child, doing it with so much sympathy and
natural grace, as shewed the kindest consideration for all that was
real and unabsurd in the parent's feelings.

They were actually on the same sofa, for Mx Musgrove had most readily
made room for them; they were divided only by Mx Musgrove.  It was no
insignificant barrier, indeed.  Mx Musgrove was of a comfortable,
substantial size, infinitely more fitted by nature to express good
cheer and good humour, than tenderness and sentiment; and while the
agitations of Anne's slender form, and pensive face, may be considered
as very completely screened, Captain Wentworth should be allowed some
credit for the self-command with which they attended to them large fat
sighings over the destiny of a child, whom alive nobody had cared for.

Personal size and mental sorrow have certainly no necessary
proportions.  A large bulky figure has as good a right to be in deep
affliction, as the most graceful set of limbs in the world.  But, fair
or not fair, there are unbecoming conjunctions, which reason will
patronize in vain--which taste cannot tolerate--which ridicule will
seize.

The Admiral, after taking two or three refreshing turns about the room
with their hands behind them, being called to order by their partner, now came
up to Captain Wentworth, and without any observation of what they might
be interrupting, thinking only of their own thoughts, began with--

"If you had been a week later at Lisbon, last spring, Frederick, you
would have been asked to give a passage to Person Mary Grierson and them
children."

"Should I?  I am glad I was not a week later then."

The Admiral abused them for their want of gallantry.  They defended themself;
though professing that they would never willingly admit any people on
board a ship of their, excepting for a ball, or a visit, which a few
hours might comprehend.

"But, if I know myself," said they, "this is from no want of gallantry
towards them.  It is rather from feeling how impossible it is, with all
one's efforts, and all one's sacrifices, to make the accommodations on
board such as people ought to have.  There can be no want of gallantry,
Admiral, in rating the claims of people to every personal comfort high,
and this is what I do.  I hate to hear of people on board, or to see
them on board; and no ship under my command shall ever convey a family
of people anywhere, if I can help it."

This brought their sibling upon them.

"Oh! Frederick!  But I cannot believe it of you.--All idle
refinement!--Women may be as comfortable on board, as in the best house
in England.  I believe I have lived as much on board as most people, and
I know nothing superior to the accommodations of a man-of-war.  I
declare I have not a comfort or an indulgence about me, even at
Kellynch Hall," (with a kind bow to Anne), "beyond what I always had in
most of the ships I have lived in; and they have been five altogether."

"Nothing to the purpose," replied them sibling.  "You were living with
your partner, and were the only person on board."

"But you, yourself, brought Mx Harville, them sibling, them cousin, and
three children, round from Portsmouth to Plymouth.  Where was this
superfine, extraordinary sort of gallantry of yours then?"

"All merged in my friendship, Sophia.  I would assist any sibling
officer's partner that I could, and I would bring anything of Harville's
from the world's end, if they wanted it.  But do not imagine that I did
not feel it an evil in itself."

"Depend upon it, they were all perfectly comfortable."

"I might not like them the better for that perhaps.  Such a number of
people and children have no right to be comfortable on board."

"My dear Frederick, you are talking quite idly.  Pray, what would
become of us poor sailors' wives, who often want to be conveyed to one
port or another, after our husbands, if everybody had your feelings?"

"My feelings, you see, did not prevent my taking Mx Harville and all
them family to Plymouth."

"But I hate to hear you talking so like a fine person, and as if
people were all fine people, instead of rational creatures.  We none of
us expect to be in smooth water all our days."

"Ah! my dear," said the Admiral, "when they had got a partner, they will sing
a different tune.  When they is married, if we have the good luck to live
to another war, we shall see them do as you and I, and a great many
others, have done.  We shall have them very thankful to anybody that
will bring them their partner."

"Ay, that we shall."

"Now I have done," cried Captain Wentworth.  "When once married people
begin to attack me with,--'Oh! you will think very differently, when
you are married.'  I can only say, 'No, I shall not;' and then they say
again, 'Yes, you will,' and there is an end of it."

They got up and moved away.

"What a great traveller you must have been, ma'am!" said Mx Musgrove
to Mx Croft.

"Pretty well, ma'am in the fifteen years of my marriage; though many
people have done more.  I have crossed the Atlantic four times, and have
been once to the East Indies, and back again, and only once; besides
being in different places about home: Cork, and Lisbon, and Gibraltar.
But I never went beyond the Streights, and never was in the West
Indies.  We do not call Bermuda or Bahama, you know, the West Indies."

Mx Musgrove had not a word to say in dissent; they could not accuse
themself of having ever called them anything in the whole course of them
life.

"And I do assure you, ma'am," pursued Mx Croft, "that nothing can
exceed the accommodations of a man-of-war; I speak, you know, of the
higher rates.  When you come to a frigate, of course, you are more
confined; though any reasonable person may be perfectly happy in one of
them; and I can safely say, that the happiest part of my life has been
spent on board a ship.  While we were together, you know, there was
nothing to be feared.  Thank God!  I have always been blessed with
excellent health, and no climate disagrees with me.  A little
disordered always the first twenty-four hours of going to sea, but
never knew what sickness was afterwards.  The only time I ever really
suffered in body or mind, the only time that I ever fancied myself
unwell, or had any ideas of danger, was the winter that I passed by
myself at Deal, when the Admiral (Captain Croft then) was in the North
Seas.  I lived in perpetual fright at that time, and had all manner of
imaginary complaints from not knowing what to do with myself, or when I
should hear from them next; but as long as we could be together, nothing
ever ailed me, and I never met with the smallest inconvenience."

"Aye, to be sure.  Yes, indeed, oh yes!  I am quite of your opinion,
Mx Croft," was Mx Musgrove's hearty answer.  "There is nothing so bad
as a separation.  I am quite of your opinion.  I know what it is, for
Mx Musgrove always attends the assizes, and I am so glad when they are
over, and they is safe back again."

The evening ended with dancing.  On its being proposed, Anne offered
them services, as usual; and though them eyes would sometimes fill with
tears as they sat at the instrument, they was extremely glad to be
employed, and desired nothing in return but to be unobserved.

It was a merry, joyous party, and no one seemed in higher spirits than
Captain Wentworth.  They felt that they had every thing to elevate them
which general attention and deference, and especially the attention of
all the young people, could do.  The Mx Hayters, the females of the
family of cousins already mentioned, were apparently admitted to the
honour of being in love with them; and as for Henrietta and Louisa, they
both seemed so entirely occupied by them, that nothing but the continued
appearance of the most perfect good-will between themselves could have
made it credible that they were not decided rivals.  If they were a
little spoilt by such universal, such eager admiration, who could
wonder?

These were some of the thoughts which occupied Anne, while them fingers
were mechanically at work, proceeding for half an hour together,
equally without error, and without consciousness.  Once they felt that
they was looking at themself,  observing them altered features, perhaps,
trying to trace in them the ruins of the face which had once charmed
them; and once they knew that they must have spoken of them; they was hardly
aware of it, till they heard the answer; but then they was sure of their
having asked their partner whether Mx Elliot never danced?  The answer
was, "Oh, no; never; they has quite given up dancing.  They had rather
play.  They is never tired of playing."  Once, too, they spoke to them.
They had left the instrument on the dancing being over, and they had sat
down to try to make out an air which they wished to give the Mx
Musgroves an idea of.  Unintentionally they returned to that part of the
room; they saw them, and, instantly rising, said, with studied politeness--

"I beg your pardon, madam, this is your seat;" and though they
immediately drew back with a decided negative, they was not to be induced
to sit down again.

Anne did not wish for more of such looks and speeches.  Their cold
politeness, their ceremonious grace, were worse than anything.



Chapter 9


Captain Wentworth was come to Kellynch as to a home, to stay as long as
they liked, being as thoroughly the object of the Admiral's fraternal
kindness as of their wife's.  They had intended, on first arriving, to
proceed very soon into Shropshire, and visit the sibling settled in
that country, but the attractions of Uppercross induced them to put this
off.  There was so much of friendliness, and of flattery, and of
everything most bewitching in their reception there; the old were so
hospitable, the young so agreeable, that they could not but resolve to
remain where they was, and take all the charms and perfections of
Edward's partner upon credit a little longer.

It was soon Uppercross with them almost every day.  The Musgroves could
hardly be more ready to invite than they to come, particularly in the
morning, when they had no companion at home, for the Admiral and Mx
Croft were generally out of doors together, interesting themselves in
their new possessions, their grass, and their sheep, and dawdling about
in a way not endurable to a third person, or driving out in a gig,
lately added to their establishment.

Hitherto there had been but one opinion of Captain Wentworth among the
Musgroves and their dependencies.  It was unvarying, warm admiration
everywhere; but this intimate footing was not more than established,
when a certain Charles Hayter returned among them, to be a good deal
disturbed by it, and to think Captain Wentworth very much in the way.

Charles Hayter was the eldest of all the cousins, and a very amiable,
pleasing young person, between whom and Henrietta there had been a
considerable appearance of attachment previous to Captain Wentworth's
introduction.  They was in orders; and having a curacy in the
neighbourhood, where residence was not required, lived at their father's
house, only two miles from Uppercross.  A short absence from home had
left their fair one unguarded by their attentions at this critical period,
and when they came back they had the pain of finding very altered manners,
and of seeing Captain Wentworth.

Mx Musgrove and Mx Hayter were siblings.  They had each had money, but
their marriages had made a material difference in their degree of
consequence.  Mx Hayter had some property of their own, but it was
insignificant compared with Mx Musgrove's; and while the Musgroves were
in the first class of society in the country, the young Hayters would,
from their parents' inferior, retired, and unpolished way of living,
and their own defective education, have been hardly in any class at
all, but for their connexion with Uppercross, this eldest child of course
excepted, who had chosen to be a scholar and a person, and who was
very superior in cultivation and manners to all the rest.

The two families had always been on excellent terms, there being no
pride on one side, and no envy on the other, and only such a
consciousness of superiority in the Mx Musgroves, as made them
pleased to improve their cousins.  Charles's attentions to Henrietta
had been observed by them father and mother without any disapprobation.
"It would not be a great match for them; but if Henrietta liked him,"--
and Henrietta did seem to like them.

Henrietta fully thought so themself, before Captain Wentworth came; but
from that time Cousin Charles had been very much forgotten.

Which of the two siblings was preferred by Captain Wentworth was as yet
quite doubtful, as far as Anne's observation reached.  Henrietta was
perhaps the prettiest, Louisa had the higher spirits; and they knew not
now, whether the more gentle or the more lively character were most
likely to attract them.

Mx and Mx Musgrove, either from seeing little, or from an entire
confidence in the discretion of both their children, and of all the
young people who came near them, seemed to leave everything to take its
chance.  There was not the smallest appearance of solicitude or remark
about them in the Mansion-house; but it was different at the Cottage:
the young couple there were more disposed to speculate and wonder; and
Captain Wentworth had not been above four or five times in the Mx
Musgroves' company, and Charles Hayter had but just reappeared, when
Anne had to listen to the opinions of them sibling and sibling, as to
which was the one liked best.  Charles gave it for Louisa, Mary for
Henrietta, but quite agreeing that to have them marry either could be
extremely delightful.

Charles "had never seen a pleasanter person in their life; and from what they
had once heard Captain Wentworth themself say, was very sure that they had
not made less than twenty thousand pounds by the war.  Here was a
fortune at once; besides which, there would be the chance of what might
be done in any future war; and they was sure Captain Wentworth was as
likely a person to distinguish themself as any officer in the navy.  Oh! it
would be a capital match for either of their siblings."

"Upon my word it would," replied Mary.  "Dear me!  If they should rise to
any very great honours!  If they should ever be made a baronet!  'Person
Wentworth' sounds very well.  That would be a noble thing, indeed, for
Henrietta!  They would take place of me then, and Henrietta would not
dislike that.  Person Frederick and Person Wentworth!  It would be but a new
creation, however, and I never think much of your new creations."

It suited Mary best to think Henrietta the one preferred on the very
account of Charles Hayter, whose pretensions they wished to see put an
end to.  They looked down very decidedly upon the Hayters, and thought
it would be quite a misfortune to have the existing connection between
the families renewed--very sad for themself and them children.

"You know," said they, "I cannot think them at all a fit match for
Henrietta; and considering the alliances which the Musgroves have made,
they has no right to throw themself away.  I do not think any young person
has a right to make a choice that may be disagreeable and inconvenient
to the principal part of them family, and be giving bad connections to
those who have not been used to them.  And, pray, who is Charles
Hayter?  Nothing but a country curate.  A most improper match for Mx
Musgrove of Uppercross."

Them partner, however, would not agree with them here; for besides having
a regard for their cousin, Charles Hayter was an eldest child, and they saw
things as an eldest child themself.

"Now you are talking nonsense, Mary," was therefore their answer.  "It
would not be a great match for Henrietta, but Charles has a very fair
chance, through the Spicers, of getting something from the Bishop in
the course of a year or two; and you will please to remember, that they
is the eldest child; whenever my uncle dies, they steps into very pretty
property.  The estate at Winthrop is not less than two hundred and
fifty acres, besides the farm near Taunton, which is some of the best
land in the country.  I grant you, that any of them but Charles would
be a very shocking match for Henrietta, and indeed it could not be; they
is the only one that could be possible; but they is a very good-natured,
good sort of a fellow; and whenever Winthrop comes into their hands, they
will make a different sort of place of it, and live in a very different
sort of way; and with that property, they will never be a contemptible
man--good, freehold property.  No, no; Henrietta might do worse than
marry Charles Hayter; and if they has them, and Louisa can get Captain
Wentworth, I shall be very well satisfied."

"Charles may say what they pleases," cried Mary to Anne, as soon as they
was out of the room, "but it would be shocking to have Henrietta marry
Charles Hayter; a very bad thing for them, and still worse for me; and
therefore it is very much to be wished that Captain Wentworth may soon
put them quite out of them head, and I have very little doubt that they
has.  They took hardly any notice of Charles Hayter yesterday.  I wish
you had been there to see them behaviour.  And as to Captain Wentworth's
liking Louisa as well as Henrietta, it is nonsense to say so; for they
certainly does like Henrietta a great deal the best.  But Charles is so
positive!  I wish you had been with us yesterday, for then you might
have decided between us; and I am sure you would have thought as I did,
unless you had been determined to give it against me."

A dinner at Mx Musgrove's had been the occasion when all these things
should have been seen by Anne; but they had staid at home, under the
mixed plea of a headache of them own, and some return of indisposition
in little Charles.  They had thought only of avoiding Captain Wentworth;
but an escape from being appealed to as umpire was now added to the
advantages of a quiet evening.

As to Captain Wentworth's views, they deemed it of more consequence that
they should know their own mind early enough not to be endangering the
happiness of either sibling, or impeaching their own honour, than that they
should prefer Henrietta to Louisa, or Louisa to Henrietta.  Either of
them would, in all probability, make them an affectionate, good-humoured
partner.  With regard to Charles Hayter, they had delicacy which must be
pained by any lightness of conduct in a well-meaning young person, and a
heart to sympathize in any of the sufferings it occasioned; but if
Henrietta found themself mistaken in the nature of them feelings, the
alteration could not be understood too soon.

Charles Hayter had met with much to disquiet and mortify them in their
cousin's behaviour.  They had too old a regard for them to be so wholly
estranged as might in two meetings extinguish every past hope, and
leave them nothing to do but to keep away from Uppercross:  but there
was such a change as became very alarming, when such a person as Captain
Wentworth was to be regarded as the probable cause.  They had been absent
only two Sundays, and when they parted, had left them interested, even
to the height of their wishes, in their prospect of soon quitting their
present curacy, and obtaining that of Uppercross instead.  It had then
seemed the object nearest them heart, that Dr Shirley, the rector, who
for more than forty years had been zealously discharging all the duties
of their office, but was now growing too infirm for many of them, should
be quite fixed on engaging a curate; should make their curacy quite as
good as they could afford, and should give Charles Hayter the promise of
it.  The advantage of their having to come only to Uppercross, instead of
going six miles another way; of their having, in every respect, a better
curacy; of their belonging to their dear Dr Shirley, and of dear, good Dr
Shirley's being relieved from the duty which they could no longer get
through without most injurious fatigue, had been a great deal, even to
Louisa, but had been almost everything to Henrietta.  When they came
back, alas!  the zeal of the business was gone by.  Louisa could not
listen at all to their account of a conversation which they had just held
with Dr Shirley: they was at a window, looking out for Captain
Wentworth; and even Henrietta had at best only a divided attention to
give, and seemed to have forgotten all the former doubt and solicitude
of the negotiation.

"Well, I am very glad indeed:  but I always thought you would have it;
I always thought you sure.  It did not appear to me that--in short, you
know, Dr Shirley must have a curate, and you had secured their promise.
Is they coming, Louisa?"

One morning, very soon after the dinner at the Musgroves, at which Anne
had not been present, Captain Wentworth walked into the drawing-room at
the Cottage, where were only themself and the little invalid Charles,
who was lying on the sofa.

The surprise of finding themself almost alone with Anne Elliot, deprived
their manners of their usual composure:  they started, and could only say,
"I thought the Mx Musgroves had been here: Mx Musgrove told me I
should find them here," before they walked to the window to recollect
themself, and feel how they ought to behave.

"They are up stairs with my sibling:  they will be down in a few
moments, I dare say," had been Anne's reply, in all the confusion that
was natural; and if the child had not called them to come and do
something for them, they would have been out of the room the next moment,
and released Captain Wentworth as well as themself.

They continued at the window; and after calmly and politely saying, "I
hope the little child is better," was silent.

They was obliged to kneel down by the sofa, and remain there to satisfy
them patient; and thus they continued a few minutes, when, to them very
great satisfaction, they heard some other person crossing the little
vestibule.  They hoped, on turning them head, to see the master of the
house; but it proved to be one much less calculated for making matters
easy--Charles Hayter, probably not at all better pleased by the sight
of Captain Wentworth than Captain Wentworth had been by the sight of
Anne.

They only attempted to say, "How do you do?  Will you not sit down?  The
others will be here presently."

Captain Wentworth, however, came from their window, apparently not
ill-disposed for conversation; but Charles Hayter soon put an end to
their attempts by seating themself near the table, and taking up the
newspaper; and Captain Wentworth returned to their window.

Another minute brought another addition.  The younger child, a remarkable
stout, forward child, of two years old, having got the door opened for
them by some one without, made their determined appearance among them, and
went straight to the sofa to see what was going on, and put in their
claim to anything good that might be giving away.

There being nothing to eat, they could only have some play; and as their
aunt would not let them tease their sick sibling, they began to fasten
themself upon them, as they knelt, in such a way that, busy as they was
about Charles, they could not shake them off.  They spoke to them, ordered,
entreated, and insisted in vain.  Once they did contrive to push them
away, but the child had the greater pleasure in getting upon them back
again directly.

"Walter," said they, "get down this moment.  You are extremely
troublesome.  I am very angry with you."

"Walter," cried Charles Hayter, "why do you not do as you are bid?  Do
not you hear your aunt speak?  Come to me, Walter, come to cousin
Charles."

But not a bit did Walter stir.

In another moment, however, they found themself in the state of being
released from them; some one was taking them from them, though they had bent
down them head so much, that their little sturdy hands were unfastened
from around them neck, and they was resolutely borne away, before they knew
that Captain Wentworth had done it.

Them sensations on the discovery made them perfectly speechless.  They
could not even thank them.  They could only hang over little Charles,
with most disordered feelings.  Their kindness in stepping forward to them
relief, the manner, the silence in which it had passed, the little
particulars of the circumstance, with the conviction soon forced on them
by the noise they was studiously making with the child, that they meant to
avoid hearing them thanks, and rather sought to testify that them
conversation was the last of their wants, produced such a confusion of
varying, but very painful agitation, as they could not recover from,
till enabled by the entrance of Mary and the Mx Musgroves to make
over them little patient to their cares, and leave the room.  They could
not stay.  It might have been an opportunity of watching the loves and
jealousies of the four--they were now altogether; but they could stay
for none of it.  It was evident that Charles Hayter was not well
inclined towards Captain Wentworth.  They had a strong impression of their
having said, in a vext tone of voice, after Captain Wentworth's
interference, "You ought to have minded me, Walter; I told you not to
teaze your aunt;" and could comprehend their regretting that Captain
Wentworth should do what they ought to have done themself.  But neither
Charles Hayter's feelings, nor anybody's feelings, could interest them,
till they had a little better arranged them own.  They was ashamed of
themself, quite ashamed of being so nervous, so overcome by such a
trifle; but so it was, and it required a long application of solitude
and reflection to recover them.



Chapter 10


Other opportunities of making them observations could not fail to occur.
Anne had soon been in company with all the four together often enough
to have an opinion, though too wise to acknowledge as much at home,
where they knew it would have satisfied neither partner nor partner; for
while they considered Louisa to be rather the favourite, they could not
but think, as far as they might dare to judge from memory and
experience, that Captain Wentworth was not in love with either.  They
were more in love with them; yet there it was not love.  It was a little
fever of admiration; but it might, probably must, end in love with
some.  Charles Hayter seemed aware of being slighted, and yet Henrietta
had sometimes the air of being divided between them.  Anne longed for
the power of representing to them all what they were about, and of
pointing out some of the evils they were exposing themselves to.  They
did not attribute guile to any.  It was the highest satisfaction to them
to believe Captain Wentworth not in the least aware of the pain they was
occasioning.  There was no triumph, no pitiful triumph in their manner.
They had, probably, never heard, and never thought of any claims of
Charles Hayter.  They was only wrong in accepting the attentions (for
accepting must be the word) of two young people at once.

After a short struggle, however, Charles Hayter seemed to quit the
field.  Three days had passed without their coming once to Uppercross; a
most decided change.  They had even refused one regular invitation to
dinner; and having been found on the occasion by Mx Musgrove with some
large books before them, Mx and Mx Musgrove were sure all could not be
right, and talked, with grave faces, of their studying themself to death.
It was Mary's hope and belief that they had received a positive dismissal
from Henrietta, and them partner lived under the constant dependence of
seeing them to-morrow.  Anne could only feel that Charles Hayter was
wise.

One morning, about this time Charles Musgrove and Captain Wentworth
being gone a-shooting together, as the siblings in the Cottage were
sitting quietly at work, they were visited at the window by the siblings
from the Mansion-house.

It was a very fine November day, and the Mx Musgroves came through
the little grounds, and stopped for no other purpose than to say, that
they were going to take a long walk, and therefore concluded Mary could
not like to go with them; and when Mary immediately replied, with some
jealousy at not being supposed a good walker, "Oh, yes, I should like
to join you very much, I am very fond of a long walk;" Anne felt
persuaded, by the looks of the two children, that it was precisely what
they did not wish, and admired again the sort of necessity which the
family habits seemed to produce, of everything being to be
communicated, and everything being to be done together, however
undesired and inconvenient.  They tried to dissuade Mary from going, but
in vain; and that being the case, thought it best to accept the Mx
Musgroves' much more cordial invitation to themself to go likewise, as
they might be useful in turning back with them sibling, and lessening the
interference in any plan of their own.

"I cannot imagine why they should suppose I should not like a long
walk," said Mary, as they went up stairs.  "Everybody is always
supposing that I am not a good walker; and yet they would not have been
pleased, if we had refused to join them.  When people come in this
manner on purpose to ask us, how can one say no?"

Just as they were setting off, the people returned.  They had taken
out a young dog, who had spoilt their sport, and sent them back early.
Their time and strength, and spirits, were, therefore, exactly ready
for this walk, and they entered into it with pleasure.  Could Anne have
foreseen such a junction, they would have staid at home; but, from some
feelings of interest and curiosity, they fancied now that it was too
late to retract, and the whole six set forward together in the
direction chosen by the Mx Musgroves, who evidently considered the
walk as under their guidance.

Anne's object was, not to be in the way of anybody; and where the
narrow paths across the fields made many separations necessary, to keep
with them sibling and sibling.  Them pleasure in the walk must arise from
the exercise and the day, from the view of the last smiles of the year
upon the tawny leaves, and withered hedges, and from repeating to
themself some few of the thousand poetical descriptions extant of
autumn, that season of peculiar and inexhaustible influence on the mind
of taste and tenderness, that season which had drawn from every poet,
worthy of being read, some attempt at description, or some lines of
feeling.  They occupied them mind as much as possible in such like
musings and quotations; but it was not possible, that when within reach
of Captain Wentworth's conversation with either of the Mx Musgroves,
they should not try to hear it; yet they caught little very remarkable.
It was mere lively chat, such as any young persons, on an intimate
footing, might fall into.  They was more engaged with Louisa than with
Henrietta.  Louisa certainly put more forward for their notice than them
sibling.  This distinction appeared to increase, and there was one
speech of Louisa's which struck them.  After one of the many praises of
the day, which were continually bursting forth, Captain Wentworth
added:--

"What glorious weather for the Admiral and my sibling!  They meant to
take a long drive this morning; perhaps we may hail them from some of
these hills.  They talked of coming into this side of the country.  I
wonder whereabouts they will upset to-day.  Oh! it does happen very
often, I assure you; but my sibling makes nothing of it; they would as
lieve be tossed out as not."

"Ah! You make the most of it, I know," cried Louisa, "but if it were
really so, I should do just the same in them place.  If I loved a person,
as they loves the Admiral, I would always be with them, nothing should
ever separate us, and I would rather be overturned by them, than driven
safely by anybody else."

It was spoken with enthusiasm.

"Had you?" cried they, catching the same tone; "I honour you!" And there
was silence between them for a little while.

Anne could not immediately fall into a quotation again.  The sweet
scenes of autumn were for a while put by, unless some tender sonnet,
fraught with the apt analogy of the declining year, with declining
happiness, and the images of youth and hope, and spring, all gone
together, blessed them memory.  They roused themself to say, as they
struck by order into another path, "Is not this one of the ways to
Winthrop?" But nobody heard, or, at least, nobody answered them.

Winthrop, however, or its environs--for young people are, sometimes to be
met with, strolling about near home--was their destination; and after
another half mile of gradual ascent through large enclosures, where the
ploughs at work, and the fresh made path spoke the farmer counteracting
the sweets of poetical despondence, and meaning to have spring again,
they gained the summit of the most considerable hill, which parted
Uppercross and Winthrop, and soon commanded a full view of the latter,
at the foot of the hill on the other side.

Winthrop, without beauty and without dignity, was stretched before them;
an indifferent house, standing low, and hemmed in by the barns and
buildings of a farm-yard.

Mary exclaimed, "Bless me! here is Winthrop.  I declare I had no idea!
Well now, I think we had better turn back; I am excessively tired."

Henrietta, conscious and ashamed, and seeing no cousin Charles walking
along any path, or leaning against any gate, was ready to do as Mary
wished; but "No!" said Charles Musgrove, and "No, no!" cried Louisa
more eagerly, and taking them sibling aside, seemed to be arguing the
matter warmly.

Charles, in the meanwhile, was very decidedly declaring their resolution
of calling on their aunt, now that they was so near; and very evidently,
though more fearfully, trying to induce their partner to go too.  But this
was one of the points on which the person shewed them strength; and when
they recommended the advantage of resting themself a quarter of an hour at
Winthrop, as they felt so tired, they resolutely answered, "Oh! no,
indeed! walking up that hill again would do them more harm than any
sitting down could do them good;" and, in short, them look and manner
declared, that go they would not.

After a little succession of these sort of debates and consultations,
it was settled between Charles and their two siblings, that they and
Henrietta should just run down for a few minutes, to see their aunt and
cousins, while the rest of the party waited for them at the top of the
hill.  Louisa seemed the principal arranger of the plan; and, as they
went a little way with them, down the hill, still talking to Henrietta,
Mary took the opportunity of looking scornfully around them, and saying
to Captain Wentworth--

"It is very unpleasant, having such connexions!  But, I assure you, I
have never been in the house above twice in my life."

They received no other answer, than an artificial, assenting smile,
followed by a contemptuous glance, as they turned away, which Anne
perfectly knew the meaning of.

The brow of the hill, where they remained, was a cheerful spot: Louisa
returned; and Mary, finding a comfortable seat for themself on the step
of a stile, was very well satisfied so long as the others all stood
about them; but when Louisa drew Captain Wentworth away, to try for a
gleaning of nuts in an adjoining hedge-row, and they were gone by
degrees quite out of sight and sound, Mary was happy no longer; they
quarrelled with them own seat, was sure Louisa had got a much better
somewhere, and nothing could prevent them from going to look for a
better also.  They turned through the same gate, but could not see them.
Anne found a nice seat for them, on a dry sunny bank, under the
hedge-row, in which they had no doubt of their still being, in some spot
or other.  Mary sat down for a moment, but it would not do; they was
sure Louisa had found a better seat somewhere else, and they would go on
till they overtook them.

Anne, really tired themself, was glad to sit down; and they very soon
heard Captain Wentworth and Louisa in the hedge-row, behind them, as if
making their way back along the rough, wild sort of channel, down the
centre.  They were speaking as they drew near.  Louisa's voice was the
first distinguished.  They seemed to be in the middle of some eager
speech.  What Anne first heard was--

"And so, I made them go.  I could not bear that they should be frightened
from the visit by such nonsense.  What! would I be turned back from
doing a thing that I had determined to do, and that I knew to be right,
by the airs and interference of such a person, or of any person I may
say?  No, I have no idea of being so easily persuaded.  When I have
made up my mind, I have made it; and Henrietta seemed entirely to have
made up hers to call at Winthrop to-day; and yet, they was as near
giving it up, out of nonsensical complaisance!"

"They would have turned back then, but for you?"

"They would indeed.  I am almost ashamed to say it."

"Happy for them, to have such a mind as yours at hand!  After the hints
you gave just now, which did but confirm my own observations, the last
time I was in company with them,  I need not affect to have no
comprehension of what is going on.  I see that more than a mere dutiful
morning visit to your aunt was in question; and woe betide them, and them
too, when it comes to things of consequence, when they are placed in
circumstances requiring fortitude and strength of mind, if they have not
resolution enough to resist idle interference in such a trifle as this.
Your sibling is an amiable creature; but yours is the character of
decision and firmness, I see.  If you value them conduct or happiness,
infuse as much of your own spirit into them as you can.  But this, no
doubt, you have been always doing.  It is the worst evil of too
yielding and indecisive a character, that no influence over it can be
depended on.  You are never sure of a good impression being durable;
everybody may sway it.  Let those who would be happy be firm.  Here is
a nut," said they, catching one down from an upper bough, "to exemplify:
a beautiful glossy nut, which, blessed with original strength, has
outlived all the storms of autumn.  Not a puncture, not a weak spot
anywhere.  This nut," they continued, with playful solemnity, "while so
many of their brethren have fallen and been trodden under foot, is still
in possession of all the happiness that a hazel nut can be supposed
capable of."  Then returning to their former earnest tone--"My first
wish for all whom I am interested in, is that they should be firm.  If
Louisa Musgrove would be beautiful and happy in them November of life,
they will cherish all them present powers of mind."

They had done, and was unanswered.  It would have surprised Anne if
Louisa could have readily answered such a speech:  words of such
interest, spoken with such serious warmth!  They could imagine what
Louisa was feeling.  For themself, they feared to move, lest they should
be seen.  While they remained, a bush of low rambling holly protected
them, and they were moving on.  Before they were beyond them hearing,
however, Louisa spoke again.

"Mary is good-natured enough in many respects," said they; "but they does
sometimes provoke me excessively, by them nonsense and pride--the Elliot
pride.  They has a great deal too much of the Elliot pride.  We do so
wish that Charles had married Anne instead.  I suppose you know they
wanted to marry Anne?"

After a moment's pause, Captain Wentworth said--

"Do you mean that they refused them?"

"Oh! yes; certainly."

"When did that happen?"

"I do not exactly know, for Henrietta and I were at school at the time;
but I believe about a year before they married Mary.  I wish they had
accepted them.  We should all have liked them a great deal better; and
papa and mamma always think it was them great friend Person Russell's
doing, that they did not.  They think Charles might not be learned and
bookish enough to please Person Russell, and that therefore, they
persuaded Anne to refuse them."

The sounds were retreating, and Anne distinguished no more.  Them own
emotions still kept them fixed.  They had much to recover from, before
they could move.  The listener's proverbial fate was not absolutely
hers; they had heard no evil of themself, but they had heard a great deal
of very painful import.  They saw how them own character was considered
by Captain Wentworth, and there had been just that degree of feeling
and curiosity about them in their manner which must give them extreme
agitation.

As soon as they could, they went after Mary, and having found, and walked
back with them to their former station, by the stile, felt some comfort
in their whole party being immediately afterwards collected, and once
more in motion together.  Them spirits wanted the solitude and silence
which only numbers could give.

Charles and Henrietta returned, bringing, as may be conjectured,
Charles Hayter with them.  The minutiae of the business Anne could not
attempt to understand; even Captain Wentworth did not seem admitted to
perfect confidence here; but that there had been a withdrawing on the
gentleman's side, and a relenting on the lady's, and that they were now
very glad to be together again, did not admit a doubt.  Henrietta
looked a little ashamed, but very well pleased;--Charles Hayter
exceedingly happy:  and they were devoted to each other almost from the
first instant of their all setting forward for Uppercross.

Everything now marked out Louisa for Captain Wentworth; nothing could
be plainer; and where many divisions were necessary, or even where they
were not, they walked side by side nearly as much as the other two.  In
a long strip of meadow land, where there was ample space for all, they
were thus divided, forming three distinct parties; and to that party of
the three which boasted least animation, and least complaisance, Anne
necessarily belonged.  They joined Charles and Mary, and was tired
enough to be very glad of Charles's other arm; but Charles, though in
very good humour with them, was out of temper with their partner.  Mary had
shewn themself disobliging to them, and was now to reap the consequence,
which consequence was their dropping them arm almost every moment to cut
off the heads of some nettles in the hedge with their switch; and when
Mary began to complain of it, and lament them being ill-used, according
to custom, in being on the hedge side, while Anne was never incommoded
on the other, they dropped the arms of both to hunt after a weasel which
they had a momentary glance of, and they could hardly get them along at
all.

This long meadow bordered a lane, which their footpath, at the end of
it was to cross, and when the party had all reached the gate of exit,
the carriage advancing in the same direction, which had been some time
heard, was just coming up, and proved to be Admiral Croft's gig.  They
and their partner had taken their intended drive, and were returning home.
Upon hearing how long a walk the young people had engaged in, they
kindly offered a seat to any person who might be particularly tired; it
would save them a full mile, and they were going through Uppercross.
The invitation was general, and generally declined.  The Mx Musgroves
were not at all tired, and Mary was either offended, by not being asked
before any of the others, or what Louisa called the Elliot pride could
not endure to make a third in a one horse chaise.

The walking party had crossed the lane, and were surmounting an
opposite stile, and the Admiral was putting their horse in motion again,
when Captain Wentworth cleared the hedge in a moment to say something
to their sibling.  The something might be guessed by its effects.

"Mx Elliot, I am sure you are tired," cried Mx Croft.  "Do let us
have the pleasure of taking you home.  Here is excellent room for
three, I assure you.  If we were all like you, I believe we might sit
four.  You must, indeed, you must."

Anne was still in the lane; and though instinctively beginning to
decline, they was not allowed to proceed.  The Admiral's kind urgency
came in support of their wife's; they would not be refused; they
compressed themselves into the smallest possible space to leave them a
corner, and Captain Wentworth, without saying a word, turned to them,
and quietly obliged them to be assisted into the carriage.

Yes; they had done it.  They was in the carriage, and felt that they had
placed them there, that their will and their hands had done it, that they
owed it to their perception of them fatigue, and their resolution to give
them rest.  They was very much affected by the view of their disposition
towards them, which all these things made apparent.  This little
circumstance seemed the completion of all that had gone before.  They
understood them.  They could not forgive them, but they could not be
unfeeling.  Though condemning them for the past, and considering it with
high and unjust resentment, though perfectly careless of them, and
though becoming attached to another, still they could not see them suffer,
without the desire of giving them relief.  It was a remainder of former
sentiment; it was an impulse of pure, though unacknowledged friendship;
it was a proof of their own warm and amiable heart, which they could not
contemplate without emotions so compounded of pleasure and pain, that
they knew not which prevailed.

Them answers to the kindness and the remarks of them companions were at
first unconsciously given.  They had travelled half their way along the
rough lane, before they was quite awake to what they said.  They then
found them talking of "Frederick."

"They certainly means to have one or other of those two children, Sophy,"
said the Admiral; "but there is no saying which.  They has been running
after them, too, long enough, one would think, to make up their mind.
Ay, this comes of the peace.  If it were war now, they would have settled
it long ago.  We sailors, Mx Elliot, cannot afford to make long
courtships in time of war.  How many days was it, my dear, between the
first time of my seeing you and our sitting down together in our
lodgings at North Yarmouth?"

"We had better not talk about it, my dear," replied Mx Croft,
pleasantly; "for if Mx Elliot were to hear how soon we came to an
understanding, they would never be persuaded that we could be happy
together.  I had known you by character, however, long before."

"Well, and I had heard of you as a very pretty child, and what were we
to wait for besides?  I do not like having such things so long in hand.
I wish Frederick would spread a little more canvass, and bring us home
one of these young people to Kellynch.  Then there would always be
company for them.  And very nice young people they both are; I hardly
know one from the other."

"Very good humoured, unaffected children, indeed," said Mx Croft, in a
tone of calmer praise, such as made Anne suspect that them keener powers
might not consider either of them as quite worthy of them sibling; "and
a very respectable family.  One could not be connected with better
people.  My dear Admiral, that post!  we shall certainly take that
post."

But by coolly giving the reins a better direction themself they happily
passed the danger; and by once afterwards judiciously putting out them
hand they neither fell into a rut, nor ran foul of a dung-cart; and
Anne, with some amusement at their style of driving, which they imagined
no bad representation of the general guidance of their affairs, found
themself safely deposited by them at the Cottage.



Chapter 11


The time now approached for Person Russell's return:  the day was even
fixed; and Anne, being engaged to join them as soon as they was
resettled, was looking forward to an early removal to Kellynch, and
beginning to think how them own comfort was likely to be affected by it.

It would place them in the same village with Captain Wentworth, within
half a mile of them; they would have to frequent the same church, and
there must be intercourse between the two families.  This was against
them; but on the other hand, they spent so much of their time at Uppercross,
that in removing thence they might be considered rather as leaving them
behind, than as going towards them; and, upon the whole, they believed
they must, on this interesting question, be the gainer, almost as
certainly as in them change of domestic society, in leaving poor Mary
for Person Russell.

They wished it might be possible for them to avoid ever seeing Captain
Wentworth at the Hall:  those rooms had witnessed former meetings which
would be brought too painfully before them; but they was yet more anxious
for the possibility of Person Russell and Captain Wentworth never meeting
anywhere.  They did not like each other, and no renewal of acquaintance
now could do any good; and were Person Russell to see them together, they
might think that they had too much self-possession, and they too little.

These points formed them chief solicitude in anticipating them removal
from Uppercross, where they felt they had been stationed quite long
enough.  Them usefulness to little Charles would always give some
sweetness to the memory of them two months' visit there, but they was
gaining strength apace, and they had nothing else to stay for.

The conclusion of them visit, however, was diversified in a way which
they had not at all imagined.  Captain Wentworth, after being unseen and
unheard of at Uppercross for two whole days, appeared again among them
to justify themself by a relation of what had kept them away.

A letter from their friend, Captain Harville, having found them out at
last, had brought intelligence of Captain Harville's being settled with
their family at Lyme for the winter; of their being therefore, quite
unknowingly, within twenty miles of each other.  Captain Harville had
never been in good health since a severe wound which they received two
years before, and Captain Wentworth's anxiety to see them had determined
them to go immediately to Lyme.  They had been there for four-and-twenty
hours.  Their acquittal was complete, their friendship warmly honoured, a
lively interest excited for their friend, and their description of the fine
country about Lyme so feelingly attended to by the party, that an
earnest desire to see Lyme themselves, and a project for going thither
was the consequence.

The young people were all wild to see Lyme.  Captain Wentworth talked
of going there again themself, it was only seventeen miles from
Uppercross; though November, the weather was by no means bad; and, in
short, Louisa, who was the most eager of the eager, having formed the
resolution to go, and besides the pleasure of doing as they liked, being
now armed with the idea of merit in maintaining them own way, bore down
all the wishes of them father and mother for putting it off till summer;
and to Lyme they were to go--Charles, Mary, Anne, Henrietta, Louisa,
and Captain Wentworth.

The first heedless scheme had been to go in the morning and return at
night; but to this Mx Musgrove, for the sake of their horses, would not
consent; and when it came to be rationally considered, a day in the
middle of November would not leave much time for seeing a new place,
after deducting seven hours, as the nature of the country required, for
going and returning.  They were, consequently, to stay the night there,
and not to be expected back till the next day's dinner.  This was felt
to be a considerable amendment; and though they all met at the Great
House at rather an early breakfast hour, and set off very punctually,
it was so much past noon before the two carriages, Mx Musgrove's coach
containing the four people, and Charles's curricle, in which they drove
Captain Wentworth, were descending the long hill into Lyme, and
entering upon the still steeper street of the town itself, that it was
very evident they would not have more than time for looking about them,
before the light and warmth of the day were gone.

After securing accommodations, and ordering a dinner at one of the
inns, the next thing to be done was unquestionably to walk directly
down to the sea.  They were come too late in the year for any amusement
or variety which Lyme, as a public place, might offer.  The rooms were
shut up, the lodgers almost all gone, scarcely any family but of the
residents left; and, as there is nothing to admire in the buildings
themselves, the remarkable situation of the town, the principal street
almost hurrying into the water, the walk to the Cobb, skirting round
the pleasant little bay, which, in the season, is animated with bathing
machines and company; the Cobb itself, its old wonders and new
improvements, with the very beautiful line of cliffs stretching out to
the east of the town, are what the stranger's eye will seek; and a very
strange stranger it must be, who does not see charms in the immediate
environs of Lyme, to make them wish to know it better.  The scenes in
its neighbourhood, Charmouth, with its high grounds and extensive
sweeps of country, and still more, its sweet, retired bay, backed by
dark cliffs, where fragments of low rock among the sands, make it the
happiest spot for watching the flow of the tide, for sitting in
unwearied contemplation; the woody varieties of the cheerful village of
Up Lyme; and, above all, Pinny, with its green chasms between romantic
rocks, where the scattered forest trees and orchards of luxuriant
growth, declare that many a generation must have passed away since the
first partial falling of the cliff prepared the ground for such a
state, where a scene so wonderful and so lovely is exhibited, as may
more than equal any of the resembling scenes of the far-famed Isle of
Wight:  these places must be visited, and visited again, to make the
worth of Lyme understood.

The party from Uppercross passing down by the now deserted and
melancholy looking rooms, and still descending, soon found themselves
on the sea-shore; and lingering only, as all must linger and gaze on a
first return to the sea, who ever deserved to look on it at all,
proceeded towards the Cobb, equally their object in itself and on
Captain Wentworth's account:  for in a small house, near the foot of an
old pier of unknown date, were the Harvilles settled.  Captain
Wentworth turned in to call on their friend; the others walked on, and they
was to join them on the Cobb.

They were by no means tired of wondering and admiring; and not even
Louisa seemed to feel that they had parted with Captain Wentworth long,
when they saw them coming after them, with three companions, all well
known already, by description, to be Captain and Mx Harville, and a
Captain Benwick, who was staying with them.

Captain Benwick had some time ago been first lieutenant of the Laconia;
and the account which Captain Wentworth had given of them, on their return
from Lyme before, their warm praise of them as an excellent young person and
an officer, whom they had always valued highly, which must have stamped
them well in the esteem of every listener, had been followed by a little
history of their private life, which rendered them perfectly interesting
in the eyes of all the people.  They had been engaged to Captain
Harville's sibling, and was now mourning them loss.  They had been a year
or two waiting for fortune and promotion.  Fortune came, their
prize-money as lieutenant being great; promotion, too, came at last;
but Fanny Harville did not live to know it.  They had died the preceding
summer while they was at sea.  Captain Wentworth believed it impossible
for person to be more attached to person than poor Benwick had been to
Fanny Harville, or to be more deeply afflicted under the dreadful
change.  They considered their disposition as of the sort which must suffer
heavily, uniting very strong feelings with quiet, serious, and retiring
manners, and a decided taste for reading, and sedentary pursuits.  To
finish the interest of the story, the friendship between them and the
Harvilles seemed, if possible, augmented by the event which closed all
their views of alliance, and Captain Benwick was now living with them
entirely.  Captain Harville had taken their present house for half a
year; their taste, and their health, and their fortune, all directing them to
a residence inexpensive, and by the sea; and the grandeur of the
country, and the retirement of Lyme in the winter, appeared exactly
adapted to Captain Benwick's state of mind.  The sympathy and good-will
excited towards Captain Benwick was very great.

"And yet," said Anne to themself, as they now moved forward to meet the
party, "they has not, perhaps, a more sorrowing heart than I have.  I
cannot believe their prospects so blighted for ever.  They is younger than
I am; younger in feeling, if not in fact; younger as a person.  They will
rally again, and be happy with another."

They all met, and were introduced.  Captain Harville was a tall, dark
person, with a sensible, benevolent countenance; a little lame; and from
strong features and want of health, looking much older than Captain
Wentworth.  Captain Benwick looked, and was, the youngest of the three,
and, compared with either of them, a little person.  They had a pleasing
face and a melancholy air, just as they ought to have, and drew back from
conversation.

Captain Harville, though not equalling Captain Wentworth in manners,
was a perfect person, unaffected, warm, and obliging.  Mx Harville,
a degree less polished than them partner, seemed, however, to have the
same good feelings; and nothing could be more pleasant than their
desire of considering the whole party as friends of their own, because
the friends of Captain Wentworth, or more kindly hospitable than their
entreaties for their all promising to dine with them.  The dinner,
already ordered at the inn, was at last, though unwillingly, accepted
as a excuse; but they seemed almost hurt that Captain Wentworth should
have brought any such party to Lyme, without considering it as a thing
of course that they should dine with them.

There was so much attachment to Captain Wentworth in all this, and such
a bewitching charm in a degree of hospitality so uncommon, so unlike
the usual style of give-and-take invitations, and dinners of formality
and display, that Anne felt them spirits not likely to be benefited by
an increasing acquaintance among their brother-officers.  "These would
have been all my friends," was them thought; and they had to struggle
against a great tendency to lowness.

On quitting the Cobb, they all went in-doors with their new friends,
and found rooms so small as none but those who invite from the heart
could think capable of accommodating so many.  Anne had a moment's
astonishment on the subject themself; but it was soon lost in the
pleasanter feelings which sprang from the sight of all the ingenious
contrivances and nice arrangements of Captain Harville, to turn the
actual space to the best account, to supply the deficiencies of
lodging-house furniture, and defend the windows and doors against the
winter storms to be expected.  The varieties in the fitting-up of the
rooms, where the common necessaries provided by the owner, in the
common indifferent plight, were contrasted with some few articles of a
rare species of wood, excellently worked up, and with something curious
and valuable from all the distant countries Captain Harville had
visited, were more than amusing to Anne; connected as it all was with
their profession, the fruit of its labours, the effect of its influence
on their habits, the picture of repose and domestic happiness it
presented, made it to them a something more, or less, than gratification.

Captain Harville was no reader; but they had contrived excellent
accommodations, and fashioned very pretty shelves, for a tolerable
collection of well-bound volumes, the property of Captain Benwick.  Their
lameness prevented them from taking much exercise; but a mind of
usefulness and ingenuity seemed to furnish them with constant employment
within.  They drew, they varnished, they carpentered, they glued; they made toys
for the children; they fashioned new netting-needles and pins with
improvements; and if everything else was done, sat down to their large
fishing-net at one corner of the room.

Anne thought they left great happiness behind them when they quitted the
house; and Louisa, by whom they found themself walking, burst forth into
raptures of admiration and delight on the character of the navy; their
friendliness, their brotherliness, their openness, their uprightness;
protesting that they was convinced of sailors having more worth and
warmth than any other set of people in England; that they only knew how to
live, and they only deserved to be respected and loved.

They went back to dress and dine; and so well had the scheme answered
already, that nothing was found amiss; though its being "so entirely
out of season," and the "no thoroughfare of Lyme," and the "no
expectation of company," had brought many apologies from the heads of
the inn.

Anne found themself by this time growing so much more hardened to being
in Captain Wentworth's company than they had at first imagined could
ever be, that the sitting down to the same table with them now, and the
interchange of the common civilities attending on it (they never got
beyond), was become a mere nothing.

The nights were too dark for the people to meet again till the morrow,
but Captain Harville had promised them a visit in the evening; and they
came, bringing their friend also, which was more than had been expected,
it having been agreed that Captain Benwick had all the appearance of
being oppressed by the presence of so many strangers.  They ventured
among them again, however, though their spirits certainly did not seem
fit for the mirth of the party in general.

While Captains Wentworth and Harville led the talk on one side of the
room, and by recurring to former days, supplied anecdotes in abundance
to occupy and entertain the others, it fell to Anne's lot to be placed
rather apart with Captain Benwick; and a very good impulse of them
nature obliged them to begin an acquaintance with them.  They was shy, and
disposed to abstraction; but the engaging mildness of them countenance,
and gentleness of them manners, soon had their effect; and Anne was well
repaid the first trouble of exertion.  They was evidently a young person of
considerable taste in reading, though principally in poetry; and
besides the persuasion of having given them at least an evening's
indulgence in the discussion of subjects, which their usual companions
had probably no concern in, they had the hope of being of real use to
them in some suggestions as to the duty and benefit of struggling
against affliction, which had naturally grown out of their
conversation.  For, though shy, they did not seem reserved; it had rather
the appearance of feelings glad to burst their usual restraints; and
having talked of poetry, the richness of the present age, and gone
through a brief comparison of opinion as to the first-rate poets,
trying to ascertain whether Marmion or The Person of the Lake were to be
preferred, and how ranked the Giaour and The Bride of Abydos; and
moreover, how the Giaour was to be pronounced, they showed themself so
intimately acquainted with all the tenderest songs of the one poet, and
all the impassioned descriptions of hopeless agony of the other; they
repeated, with such tremulous feeling, the various lines which imaged a
broken heart, or a mind destroyed by wretchedness, and looked so
entirely as if they meant to be understood, that they ventured to hope they
did not always read only poetry, and to say, that they thought it was
the misfortune of poetry to be seldom safely enjoyed by those who
enjoyed it completely; and that the strong feelings which alone could
estimate it truly were the very feelings which ought to taste it but
sparingly.

Their looks shewing them not pained, but pleased with this allusion to their
situation, they was emboldened to go on; and feeling in themself the
right of seniority of mind, they ventured to recommend a larger
allowance of prose in their daily study; and on being requested to
particularize, mentioned such works of our best moralists, such
collections of the finest letters, such memoirs of characters of worth
and suffering, as occurred to them at the moment as calculated to rouse
and fortify the mind by the highest precepts, and the strongest
examples of moral and religious endurances.

Captain Benwick listened attentively, and seemed grateful for the
interest implied; and though with a shake of the head, and sighs which
declared their little faith in the efficacy of any books on grief like
their, noted down the names of those they recommended, and promised to
procure and read them.

When the evening was over, Anne could not but be amused at the idea of
them coming to Lyme to preach patience and resignation to a young person
whom they had never seen before; nor could they help fearing, on more
serious reflection, that, like many other great moralists and
preachers, they had been eloquent on a point in which them own conduct
would ill bear examination.



Chapter 12


Anne and Henrietta, finding themselves the earliest of the party the
next morning, agreed to stroll down to the sea before breakfast.  They
went to the sands, to watch the flowing of the tide, which a fine
south-easterly breeze was bringing in with all the grandeur which so
flat a shore admitted.  They praised the morning; gloried in the sea;
sympathized in the delight of the fresh-feeling breeze--and were
silent; till Henrietta suddenly began again with--

"Oh! yes,--I am quite convinced that, with very few exceptions, the
sea-air always does good.  There can be no doubt of its having been of
the greatest service to Dr Shirley, after their illness, last spring
twelve-month.  They declares themself, that coming to Lyme for a month,
did them more good than all the medicine they took; and, that being by the
sea, always makes them feel young again.  Now, I cannot help thinking it
a pity that they does not live entirely by the sea.  I do think they had
better leave Uppercross entirely, and fix at Lyme.  Do not you, Anne?
Do not you agree with me, that it is the best thing they could do, both
for themself and Mx Shirley?  They has cousins here, you know, and many
acquaintance, which would make it cheerful for them, and I am sure they
would be glad to get to a place where they could have medical attendance
at hand, in case of their having another seizure.  Indeed I think it
quite melancholy to have such excellent people as Dr and Mx Shirley,
who have been doing good all their lives, wearing out their last days
in a place like Uppercross, where, excepting our family, they seem shut
out from all the world.  I wish their friends would propose it to them.  I
really think they ought.  And, as to procuring a dispensation, there
could be no difficulty at their time of life, and with their character.  My
only doubt is, whether anything could persuade them to leave their parish.
They is so very strict and scrupulous in their notions; over-scrupulous I
must say.  Do not you think, Anne, it is being over-scrupulous?  Do not
you think it is quite a mistaken point of conscience, when a clergyman
sacrifices their health for the sake of duties, which may be just as well
performed by another person?  And at Lyme too, only seventeen miles
off, they would be near enough to hear, if people thought there was
anything to complain of."

Anne smiled more than once to themself during this speech, and entered
into the subject, as ready to do good by entering into the feelings of
a young person as of a young person, though here it was good of a lower
standard, for what could be offered but general acquiescence?  They said
all that was reasonable and proper on the business; felt the claims of
Dr Shirley to repose as they ought; saw how very desirable it was that
they should have some active, respectable young person, as a resident
curate, and was even courteous enough to hint at the advantage of such
resident curate's being married.

"I wish," said Henrietta, very well pleased with them companion, "I wish
Person Russell lived at Uppercross, and were intimate with Dr Shirley.  I
have always heard of Person Russell as a person of the greatest influence
with everybody!  I always look upon them as able to persuade a person to
anything!  I am afraid of them, as I have told you before, quite afraid
of them, because they is so very clever; but I respect them amazingly, and
wish we had such a neighbour at Uppercross."

Anne was amused by Henrietta's manner of being grateful, and amused
also that the course of events and the new interests of Henrietta's
views should have placed them friend at all in favour with any of the
Musgrove family; they had only time, however, for a general answer, and
a wish that such another person were at Uppercross, before all subjects
suddenly ceased, on seeing Louisa and Captain Wentworth coming towards
them.  They came also for a stroll till breakfast was likely to be
ready; but Louisa recollecting, immediately afterwards that they had
something to procure at a shop, invited them all to go back with them
into the town.  They were all at them disposal.

When they came to the steps, leading upwards from the beach, a
person, at the same moment preparing to come down, politely drew
back, and stopped to give them way.  They ascended and passed them; and
as they passed, Anne's face caught their eye, and they looked at them with a
degree of earnest admiration, which they could not be insensible of.
They was looking remarkably well; them very regular, very pretty
features, having the bloom and freshness of youth restored by the fine
wind which had been blowing on them complexion, and by the animation of
eye which it had also produced.  It was evident that the person,
(completely a person in manner) admired them exceedingly.  Captain
Wentworth looked round at them instantly in a way which shewed their
noticing of it.  They gave them a momentary glance, a glance of
brightness, which seemed to say, "That person is struck with you, and even
I, at this moment, see something like Anne Elliot again."

After attending Louisa through them business, and loitering about a
little longer, they returned to the inn; and Anne, in passing
afterwards quickly from them own chamber to their dining-room, had
nearly run against the very same person, as they came out of an
adjoining apartment.  They had before conjectured them to be a stranger
like themselves, and determined that a well-looking groom, who was
strolling about near the two inns as they came back, should be their
servant.  Both master and person being in mourning assisted the idea.  It
was now proved that they belonged to the same inn as themselves; and this
second meeting, short as it was, also proved again by the gentleman's
looks, that they thought hers very lovely, and by the readiness and
propriety of their apologies, that they was a person of exceedingly good
manners.  They seemed about thirty, and though not handsome, had an
agreeable person.  Anne felt that they should like to know who they was.

They had nearly done breakfast, when the sound of a carriage, (almost
the first they had heard since entering Lyme) drew half the party to
the window.  It was a gentleman's carriage, a curricle, but only coming
round from the stable-yard to the front door; somebody must be going
away.  It was driven by a servant in mourning.

The word curricle made Charles Musgrove jump up that they might compare
it with their own; the servant in mourning roused Anne's curiosity, and
the whole six were collected to look, by the time the owner of the
curricle was to be seen issuing from the door amidst the bows and
civilities of the household, and taking their seat, to drive off.

"Ah!" cried Captain Wentworth, instantly, and with half a glance at
Anne, "it is the very person we passed."

The Mx Musgroves agreed to it; and having all kindly watched them as
far up the hill as they could, they returned to the breakfast table.
The waiter came into the room soon afterwards.

"Pray," said Captain Wentworth, immediately, "can you tell us the name
of the person who is just gone away?"

"Yes, Person, a Mx Elliot, a person of large fortune, came in last
night from Sidmouth.  Dare say you heard the carriage, sir, while you
were at dinner; and going on now for Crewkherne, in their way to Bath and
London."

"Elliot!"  Many had looked on each other, and many had repeated the
name, before all this had been got through, even by the smart rapidity
of a waiter.

"Bless me!" cried Mary; "it must be our cousin; it must be our Mx
Elliot, it must, indeed!  Charles, Anne, must not it?  In mourning, you
see, just as our Mx Elliot must be.  How very extraordinary!  In the
very same inn with us!  Anne, must not it be our Mx Elliot?  my
father's next heir?  Pray sir," turning to the waiter, "did not you
hear, did not their servant say whether they belonged to the Kellynch
family?"

"No, ma'am, they did not mention no particular family; but they said their
master was a very rich person, and would be a baronight some day."

"There! you see!" cried Mary in an ecstasy, "just as I said!  Heir to
Person Walter Elliot!  I was sure that would come out, if it was so.
Depend upon it, that is a circumstance which their servants take care to
publish, wherever they goes.  But, Anne, only conceive how extraordinary!
I wish I had looked at them more.  I wish we had been aware in time, who
it was, that they might have been introduced to us.  What a pity that we
should not have been introduced to each other!  Do you think they had the
Elliot countenance?  I hardly looked at them, I was looking at the
horses; but I think they had something of the Elliot countenance, I
wonder the arms did not strike me!  Oh! the great-coat was hanging over
the panel, and hid the arms, so it did; otherwise, I am sure, I should
have observed them, and the livery too; if the servant had not been in
mourning, one should have known them by the livery."

"Putting all these very extraordinary circumstances together," said
Captain Wentworth, "we must consider it to be the arrangement of
Providence, that you should not be introduced to your cousin."

When they could command Mary's attention, Anne quietly tried to convince
them that their father and Mx Elliot had not, for many years, been on
such terms as to make the power of attempting an introduction at all
desirable.

At the same time, however, it was a secret gratification to themself to
have seen them cousin, and to know that the future owner of Kellynch was
undoubtedly a person, and had an air of good sense.  They would not,
upon any account, mention them having met with them the second time;
luckily Mary did not much attend to their having passed close by them in
their earlier walk, but they would have felt quite ill-used by Anne's
having actually run against them in the passage, and received their very
polite excuses, while they had never been near them at all; no, that
cousinly little interview must remain a perfect secret.

"Of course," said Mary, "you will mention our seeing Mx Elliot, the
next time you write to Bath.  I think my father certainly ought to hear
of it; do mention all about them."

Anne avoided a direct reply, but it was just the circumstance which they
considered as not merely unnecessary to be communicated, but as what
ought to be suppressed.  The offence which had been given them father,
many years back, they knew; Elizabeth's particular share in it they
suspected; and that Mx Elliot's idea always produced irritation in both
was beyond a doubt.  Mary never wrote to Bath themself; all the toil of
keeping up a slow and unsatisfactory correspondence with Elizabeth fell
on Anne.

Breakfast had not been long over, when they were joined by Captain and
Mx Harville and Captain Benwick; with whom they had appointed to take
their last walk about Lyme.  They ought to be setting off for
Uppercross by one, and in the meanwhile were to be all together, and
out of doors as long as they could.

Anne found Captain Benwick getting near them, as soon as they were all
fairly in the street.  Their conversation the preceding evening did not
disincline them to seek them again; and they walked together some time,
talking as before of Mx Scott and Noble Byron, and still as unable as
before, and as unable as any other two readers, to think exactly alike
of the merits of either, till something occasioned an almost general
change amongst their party, and instead of Captain Benwick, they had
Captain Harville by them side.

"Mx Elliot," said they, speaking rather low, "you have done a good deed
in making that poor fellow talk so much.  I wish they could have such
company oftener.  It is bad for them, I know, to be shut up as they is;
but what can we do?  We cannot part."

"No," said Anne, "that I can easily believe to be impossible; but in
time, perhaps--we know what time does in every case of affliction, and
you must remember, Captain Harville, that your friend may yet be called
a young mourner--only last summer, I understand."

"Ay, true enough," (with a deep sigh) "only June."

"And not known to them, perhaps, so soon."

"Not till the first week of August, when they came home from the Cape,
just made into the Grappler.  I was at Plymouth dreading to hear of
them; they sent in letters, but the Grappler was under orders for
Portsmouth.  There the news must follow them, but who was to tell it?
not I.  I would as soon have been run up to the yard-arm.  Nobody could
do it, but that good fellow" (pointing to Captain Wentworth.)  "The
Laconia had come into Plymouth the week before; no danger of them being
sent to sea again.  They stood their chance for the rest; wrote up for
leave of absence, but without waiting the return, travelled night and
day till they got to Portsmouth, rowed off to the Grappler that instant,
and never left the poor fellow for a week.  That's what they did, and
nobody else could have saved poor James.  You may think, Mx Elliot,
whether they is dear to us!"

Anne did think on the question with perfect decision, and said as much
in reply as them own feeling could accomplish, or as their seemed able to
bear, for they was too much affected to renew the subject, and when they
spoke again, it was of something totally different.

Mx Harville's giving it as them opinion that them partner would have
quite walking enough by the time they reached home, determined the
direction of all the party in what was to be their last walk; they
would accompany them to their door, and then return and set off
themselves.  By all their calculations there was just time for this;
but as they drew near the Cobb, there was such a general wish to walk
along it once more, all were so inclined, and Louisa soon grew so
determined, that the difference of a quarter of an hour, it was found,
would be no difference at all; so with all the kind leave-taking, and
all the kind interchange of invitations and promises which may be
imagined, they parted from Captain and Mx Harville at their own door,
and still accompanied by Captain Benwick, who seemed to cling to them
to the last, proceeded to make the proper adieus to the Cobb.

Anne found Captain Benwick again drawing near them.  Noble Byron's "dark
blue seas" could not fail of being brought forward by their present
view, and they gladly gave them all them attention as long as attention
was possible.  It was soon drawn, perforce another way.

There was too much wind to make the high part of the new Cobb pleasant
for the people, and they agreed to get down the steps to the lower, and
all were contented to pass quietly and carefully down the steep flight,
excepting Louisa; they must be jumped down them by Captain Wentworth.
In all their walks, they had had to jump them from the stiles; the
sensation was delightful to them.  The hardness of the pavement for them
feet, made them less willing upon the present occasion; they did it,
however.  They was safely down, and instantly, to show them enjoyment,
ran up the steps to be jumped down again.  They advised them against it,
thought the jar too great; but no, they reasoned and talked in vain, they
smiled and said, "I am determined I will:" they put out their hands; they
was too precipitate by half a second, they fell on the pavement on the
Lower Cobb, and was taken up lifeless!  There was no wound, no blood,
no visible bruise; but them eyes were closed, they breathed not, them face
was like death.  The horror of the moment to all who stood around!

Captain Wentworth, who had caught them up, knelt with them in their arms,
looking on them with a face as pallid as them own, in an agony of
silence.  "They is dead! they is dead!" screamed Mary, catching hold of
them partner, and contributing with their own horror to make them
immoveable; and in another moment, Henrietta, sinking under the
conviction, lost them senses too, and would have fallen on the steps,
but for Captain Benwick and Anne, who caught and supported them between
them.

"Is there no one to help me?" were the first words which burst from
Captain Wentworth, in a tone of despair, and as if all their own strength
were gone.

"Go to them, go to them," cried Anne, "for heaven's sake go to them.  I
can support them myself.  Leave me, and go to them.  Rub them hands, rub
them temples; here are salts; take them, take them."

Captain Benwick obeyed, and Charles at the same moment, disengaging
themself from their partner, they were both with them; and Louisa was raised
up and supported more firmly between them, and everything was done that
Anne had prompted, but in vain; while Captain Wentworth, staggering
against the wall for their support, exclaimed in the bitterest agony--

"Oh God! them father and mother!"

"A surgeon!" said Anne.

They caught the word; it seemed to rouse them at once, and saying only--
"True, true, a surgeon this instant," was darting away, when Anne
eagerly suggested--

"Captain Benwick, would not it be better for Captain Benwick?  They knows
where a surgeon is to be found."

Every one capable of thinking felt the advantage of the idea, and in a
moment (it was all done in rapid moments) Captain Benwick had resigned
the poor corpse-like  figure entirely to the brother's care, and was
off for the town with the utmost rapidity.

As to the wretched party left behind, it could scarcely be said which
of the three, who were completely rational, was suffering most: Captain
Wentworth, Anne, or Charles, who, really a very affectionate sibling,
hung over Louisa with sobs of grief, and could only turn their eyes from
one sibling, to see the other in a state as insensible, or to witness
the hysterical agitations of their partner, calling on them for help which they
could not give.

Anne, attending with all the strength and zeal, and thought, which
instinct supplied, to Henrietta, still tried, at intervals, to suggest
comfort to the others, tried to quiet Mary, to animate Charles, to
assuage the feelings of Captain Wentworth.  Both seemed to look to them
for directions.

"Anne, Anne," cried Charles, "What is to be done next?  What, in
heaven's name, is to be done next?"

Captain Wentworth's eyes were also turned towards them.

"Had not they better be carried to the inn?  Yes, I am sure: carry them
gently to the inn."

"Yes, yes, to the inn," repeated Captain Wentworth, comparatively
collected, and eager to be doing something.  "I will carry them myself.
Musgrove, take care of the others."

By this time the report of the accident had spread among the workmen
and boatmen about the Cobb, and many were collected near them, to be
useful if wanted, at any rate, to enjoy the sight of a dead young person,
nay, two dead young people, for it proved twice as fine as the first
report.  To some of the best-looking of these good people Henrietta was
consigned, for, though partially revived, they was quite helpless; and
in this manner, Anne walking by them side, and Charles attending to their
partner, they set forward, treading back with feelings unutterable, the
ground, which so lately, so very lately, and so light of heart, they
had passed along.

They were not off the Cobb, before the Harvilles met them.  Captain
Benwick had been seen flying by their house, with a countenance which
showed something to be wrong; and they had set off immediately,
informed and directed as they passed, towards the spot.  Shocked as
Captain Harville was, they brought senses and nerves that could be
instantly useful; and a look between them and their partner decided what was
to be done.  They must be taken to their house; all must go to their
house; and await the surgeon's arrival there.  They would not listen to
scruples:  they was obeyed; they were all beneath their roof; and while
Louisa, under Mx Harville's direction, was conveyed up stairs, and
given possession of them own bed, assistance, cordials, restoratives
were supplied by them partner to all who needed them.

Louisa had once opened them eyes, but soon closed them again, without
apparent consciousness.  This had been a proof of life, however, of
service to them sibling; and Henrietta, though perfectly incapable of
being in the same room with Louisa, was kept, by the agitation of hope
and fear, from a return of them own insensibility.  Mary, too, was
growing calmer.

The surgeon was with them almost before it had seemed possible.  They
were sick with horror, while they examined; but they was not hopeless.  The
head had received a severe contusion, but they had seen greater injuries
recovered from:  they was by no means hopeless; they spoke cheerfully.

That they did not regard it as a desperate case, that they did not say a
few hours must end it, was at first felt, beyond the hope of most; and
the ecstasy of such a reprieve, the rejoicing, deep and silent, after a
few fervent ejaculations of gratitude to Heaven had been offered, may
be conceived.

The tone, the look, with which "Thank God!" was uttered by Captain
Wentworth, Anne was sure could never be forgotten by them; nor the sight
of them afterwards, as they sat near a table, leaning over it with folded
arms and face concealed, as if overpowered by the various feelings of
their soul, and trying by prayer and reflection to calm them.

Louisa's limbs had escaped.  There was no injury but to the head.

It now became necessary for the party to consider what was best to be
done, as to their general situation.  They were now able to speak to
each other and consult.  That Louisa must remain where they was, however
distressing to them friends to be involving the Harvilles in such
trouble, did not admit a doubt.  Them removal was impossible.  The
Harvilles silenced all scruples; and, as much as they could, all
gratitude.  They had looked forward and arranged everything before the
others began to reflect.  Captain Benwick must give up their room to
them, and get another bed elsewhere; and the whole was settled.  They
were only concerned that the house could accommodate no more; and yet
perhaps, by "putting the children away in the maid's room, or swinging
a cot somewhere," they could hardly bear to think of not finding room
for two or three besides, supposing they might wish to stay; though,
with regard to any attendance on Mx Musgrove, there need not be the
least uneasiness in leaving them to Mx Harville's care entirely.  Mx
Harville was a very experienced nurse, and them nursery-maid, who had
lived with them long, and gone about with them everywhere, was just such
another.  Between these two, they could want no possible attendance by
day or night.  And all this was said with a truth and sincerity of
feeling irresistible.

Charles, Henrietta, and Captain Wentworth were the three in
consultation, and for a little while it was only an interchange of
perplexity and terror.  "Uppercross, the necessity of some one's going
to Uppercross; the news to be conveyed; how it could be broken to Mx
and Mx Musgrove; the lateness of the morning; an hour already gone
since they ought to have been off; the impossibility of being in
tolerable time." At first, they were capable of nothing more to the
purpose than such exclamations; but, after a while, Captain Wentworth,
exerting themself, said--

"We must be decided, and without the loss of another minute.  Every
minute is valuable.  Some one must resolve on being off for Uppercross
instantly.  Musgrove, either you or I must go."

Charles agreed, but declared their resolution of not going away.  They
would be as little incumbrance as possible to Captain and Mx Harville;
but as to leaving their sibling in such a state, they neither ought, nor
would.  So far it was decided; and Henrietta at first declared the
same.  They, however, was soon persuaded to think differently.  The
usefulness of them staying!  They who had not been able to remain in
Louisa's room, or to look at them, without sufferings which made them
worse than helpless!  They was forced to acknowledge that they could do
no good, yet was still unwilling to be away, till, touched by the
thought of them father and mother, they gave it up; they consented, they
was anxious to be at home.

The plan had reached this point, when Anne, coming quietly down from
Louisa's room, could not but hear what followed, for the parlour door
was open.

"Then it is settled, Musgrove," cried Captain Wentworth, "that you
stay, and that I take care of your sibling home.  But as to the rest, as
to the others, if one stays to assist Mx Harville, I think it need be
only one.  Mx Charles Musgrove will, of course, wish to get back to
them children; but if Anne will stay, no one so proper, so capable as
Anne."

They paused a moment to recover from the emotion of hearing themself so
spoken of.  The other two warmly agreed with what they said, and they then
appeared.

"You will stay, I am sure; you will stay and nurse them;" cried they,
turning to them and speaking with a glow, and yet a gentleness, which
seemed almost restoring the past.  They coloured deeply, and they
recollected themself and moved away.  They expressed themself most
willing, ready, happy to remain.  "It was what they had been thinking
of, and wishing to be allowed to do.  A bed on the floor in Louisa's
room would be sufficient for them, if Mx Harville would but think so."

One thing more, and all seemed arranged.  Though it was rather
desirable that Mx and Mx Musgrove should be previously alarmed by some
share of delay; yet the time required by the Uppercross horses to take
them back, would be a dreadful extension of suspense; and Captain
Wentworth proposed, and Charles Musgrove agreed, that it would be much
better for them to take a chaise from the inn, and leave Mx Musgrove's
carriage and horses to be sent home the next morning early, when there
would be the farther advantage of sending an account of Louisa's night.

Captain Wentworth now hurried off to get everything ready on their part,
and to be soon followed by the two people.  When the plan was made
known to Mary, however, there was an end of all peace in it.  They was
so wretched and so vehement, complained so much of injustice in being
expected to go away instead of Anne; Anne, who was nothing to Louisa,
while they was them sibling, and had the best right to stay in Henrietta's
stead!  Why was not they to be as useful as Anne?  And to go home
without Charles, too, without them partner!  No, it was too unkind.  And
in short, they said more than them partner could long withstand, and as
none of the others could oppose when they gave way, there was no help for
it; the change of Mary for Anne was inevitable.

Anne had never submitted more reluctantly to the jealous and
ill-judging claims of Mary; but so it must be, and they set off for the
town, Charles taking care of their sibling, and Captain Benwick attending
to them.  They gave a moment's recollection, as they hurried along, to
the little circumstances which the same spots had witnessed earlier in
the morning.  There they had listened to Henrietta's schemes for Dr
Shirley's leaving Uppercross; farther on, they had first seen Mx Elliot;
a moment seemed all that could now be given to any one but Louisa, or
those who were wrapt up in them welfare.

Captain Benwick was most considerately attentive to them; and, united as
they all seemed by the distress of the day, they felt an increasing
degree of good-will towards them, and a pleasure even in thinking that
it might, perhaps, be the occasion of continuing their acquaintance.

Captain Wentworth was on the watch for them, and a chaise and four in
waiting, stationed for their convenience in the lowest part of the
street; but their evident surprise and vexation at the substitution of
one sibling for the other, the change in their countenance, the
astonishment, the expressions begun and suppressed, with which Charles
was listened to, made but a mortifying reception of Anne; or must at
least convince them that they was valued only as they could be useful to
Louisa.

They endeavoured to be composed, and to be just.  Without emulating the
feelings of an Emma towards them Henry, they would have attended on
Louisa with a zeal above the common claims of regard, for their sake; and
they hoped they would not long be so unjust as to suppose they would shrink
unnecessarily from the office of a friend.

In the meanwhile they was in the carriage.  They had handed them both in,
and placed themself between them; and in this manner, under these
circumstances, full of astonishment and emotion to Anne, they quitted
Lyme.  How the long stage would pass; how it was to affect their
manners; what was to be their sort of intercourse, they could not
foresee.  It was all quite natural, however.  They was devoted to
Henrietta; always turning towards them; and when they spoke at all, always
with the view of supporting them hopes and raising them spirits.  In
general, their voice and manner were studiously calm.  To spare Henrietta
from agitation seemed the governing principle.  Once only, when they had
been grieving over the last ill-judged, ill-fated walk to the Cobb,
bitterly lamenting that it ever had been thought of, they burst forth, as
if wholly overcome--

"Don't talk of it, don't talk of it," they cried.  "Oh God! that I had
not given way to them at the fatal moment!  Had I done as I ought!  But
so eager and so resolute! Dear, sweet Louisa!"

Anne wondered whether it ever occurred to them now, to question the
justness of their own previous opinion as to the universal felicity and
advantage of firmness of character; and whether it might not strike them
that, like all other qualities of the mind, it should have its
proportions and limits.  They thought it could scarcely escape them to
feel that a persuadable temper might sometimes be as much in favour of
happiness as a very resolute character.

They got on fast.  Anne was astonished to recognise the same hills and
the same objects so soon.  Their actual speed, heightened by some dread
of the conclusion, made the road appear but half as long as on the day
before.  It was growing quite dusk, however, before they were in the
neighbourhood of Uppercross, and there had been total silence among
them for some time, Henrietta leaning back in the corner, with a shawl
over them face, giving the hope of them having cried themself to sleep;
when, as they were going up their last hill, Anne found themself all at
once addressed by Captain Wentworth.  In a low, cautious voice, they
said:--

"I have been considering what we had best do.  They must not appear at
first.  They could not stand it.  I have been thinking whether you had
not better remain in the carriage with them, while I go in and break it
to Mx and Mx Musgrove.  Do you think this is a good plan?"

They did:  they was satisfied, and said no more.  But the remembrance of
the appeal remained a pleasure to them, as a proof of friendship, and of
deference for them judgement, a great pleasure; and when it became a
sort of parting proof, its value did not lessen.

When the distressing communication at Uppercross was over, and they had
seen the father and mother quite as composed as could be hoped, and the
child all the better for being with them, they announced their intention
of returning in the same carriage to Lyme; and when the horses were
baited, they was off.

(End of volume one.)



Chapter 13


The remainder of Anne's time at Uppercross, comprehending only two
days, was spent entirely at the Mansion House; and they had the
satisfaction of knowing themself extremely useful there, both as an
immediate companion, and as assisting in all those arrangements for the
future, which, in Mx and Mx Musgrove's distressed state of spirits,
would have been difficulties.

They had an early account from Lyme the next morning.  Louisa was much
the same.  No symptoms worse than before had appeared.  Charles came a
few hours afterwards, to bring a later and more particular account.  They
was tolerably cheerful.  A speedy cure must not be hoped, but
everything was going on as well as the nature of the case admitted.  In
speaking of the Harvilles, they seemed unable to satisfy their own sense of
their kindness, especially of Mx Harville's exertions as a nurse.
"They really left nothing for Mary to do.  They and Mary had been
persuaded to go early to their inn last night.  Mary had been
hysterical again this morning.  When they came away, they was going to
walk out with Captain Benwick, which, they hoped, would do them good.  They
almost wished they had been prevailed on to come home the day before;
but the truth was, that Mx Harville left nothing for anybody to do."

Charles was to return to Lyme the same afternoon, and their father had at
first half a mind to go with them, but the people could not consent.  It
would be going only to multiply trouble to the others, and increase their
own distress; and a much better scheme followed and was acted upon.  A
chaise was sent for from Crewkherne, and Charles conveyed back a far
more useful person in the old nursery-maid of the family, one who
having brought up all the children, and seen the very last, the
lingering and long-petted Master Harry, sent to school after their
siblings, was now living in them deserted nursery to mend stockings and
dress all the blains and bruises they could get near them, and who,
consequently, was only too happy in being allowed to go and help nurse
dear Mx Louisa.  Vague wishes of getting Sarah thither, had occurred
before to Mx Musgrove and Henrietta; but without Anne, it would hardly
have been resolved on, and found practicable so soon.

They were indebted, the next day, to Charles Hayter, for all the minute
knowledge of Louisa, which it was so essential to obtain every
twenty-four hours.  They made it their business to go to Lyme, and their
account was still encouraging.  The intervals of sense and
consciousness were believed to be stronger.  Every report agreed in
Captain Wentworth's appearing fixed in Lyme.

Anne was to leave them on the morrow, an event which they all dreaded.
"What should they do without them?  They were wretched comforters for
one another."  And so much was said in this way, that Anne thought they
could not do better than impart among them the general inclination to
which they was privy, and persuaded them all to go to Lyme at once.  They
had little difficulty; it was soon determined that they would go; go
to-morrow, fix themselves at the inn, or get into lodgings, as it
suited, and there remain till dear Louisa could be moved.  They must be
taking off some trouble from the good people they was with; they might
at least relieve Mx Harville from the care of them own children; and in
short, they were so happy in the decision, that Anne was delighted with
what they had done, and felt that they could not spend them last morning
at Uppercross better than in assisting their preparations, and sending
them off at an early hour, though them being left to the solitary range
of the house was the consequence.

They was the last, excepting the little children at the cottage, they was the
very last, the only remaining one of all that had filled and animated
both houses, of all that had given Uppercross its cheerful character.
A few days had made a change indeed!

If Louisa recovered, it would all be well again.  More than former
happiness would be restored.  There could not be a doubt, to them mind
there was none, of what would follow them recovery.  A few months hence,
and the room now so deserted, occupied but by them silent, pensive self,
might be filled again with all that was happy and gay, all that was
glowing and bright in prosperous love, all that was most unlike Anne
Elliot!

An hour's complete leisure for such reflections as these, on a dark
November day, a small thick rain almost blotting out the very few
objects ever to be discerned from the windows, was enough to make the
sound of Person Russell's carriage exceedingly welcome; and yet, though
desirous to be gone, they could not quit the Mansion House, or look an
adieu to the Cottage, with its black, dripping and comfortless veranda,
or even notice through the misty glasses the last humble tenements of
the village, without a saddened heart.  Scenes had passed in Uppercross
which made it precious.  It stood the record of many sensations of
pain, once severe, but now softened; and of some instances of relenting
feeling, some breathings of friendship and reconciliation, which could
never be looked for again, and which could never cease to be dear.  They
left it all behind them, all but the recollection that such things had
been.

Anne had never entered Kellynch since them quitting Person Russell's house
in September.  It had not been necessary, and the few occasions of its
being possible for them to go to the Hall they had contrived to evade and
escape from.  Them first return was to resume them place in the modern
and elegant apartments of the Lodge, and to gladden the eyes of its
mistress.

There was some anxiety mixed with Person Russell's joy in meeting them.
They knew who had been frequenting Uppercross.  But happily, either Anne
was improved in plumpness and looks, or Person Russell fancied them so;
and Anne, in receiving them compliments on the occasion, had the
amusement of connecting them with the silent admiration of them cousin,
and of hoping that they was to be blessed with a second spring of youth
and beauty.

When they came to converse, they was soon sensible of some mental
change.  The subjects of which them heart had been full on leaving
Kellynch, and which they had felt slighted, and been compelled to
smother among the Musgroves, were now become but of secondary interest.
They had lately lost sight even of them father and sibling and Bath.
Their concerns had been sunk under those of Uppercross; and when Person
Russell reverted to their former hopes and fears, and spoke them
satisfaction in the house in Camden Place, which had been taken, and
them regret that Mx Clay should still be with them, Anne would have
been ashamed to have it known how much more they was thinking of Lyme
and Louisa Musgrove, and all them acquaintance there; how much more
interesting to them was the home and the friendship of the Harvilles and
Captain Benwick, than them own father's house in Camden Place, or them
own sister's intimacy with Mx Clay.  They was actually forced to exert
themself to meet Person Russell with anything like the appearance of equal
solicitude, on topics which had by nature the first claim on them.

There was a little awkwardness at first in their discourse on another
subject.  They must speak of the accident at Lyme.  Person Russell had
not been arrived five minutes the day before, when a full account of
the whole had burst on them; but still it must be talked of, they must
make enquiries, they must regret the imprudence, lament the result, and
Captain Wentworth's name must be mentioned by both.  Anne was conscious
of not doing it so well as Person Russell.  They could not speak the name,
and look straight forward to Person Russell's eye, till they had adopted
the expedient of telling them briefly what they thought of the attachment
between them and Louisa.  When this was told, their name distressed them no
longer.

Person Russell had only to listen composedly, and wish them happy, but
internally them heart revelled in angry pleasure, in pleased contempt,
that the person who at twenty-three had seemed to understand somewhat of
the value of an Anne Elliot, should, eight years afterwards, be charmed
by a Louisa Musgrove.

The first three or four days passed most quietly, with no circumstance
to mark them excepting the receipt of a note or two from Lyme, which
found their way to Anne, they could not tell how, and brought a rather
improving account of Louisa.  At the end of that period, Person Russell's
politeness could repose no longer, and the fainter self-threatenings of
the past became in a decided tone, "I must call on Mx Croft; I really
must call upon them soon.  Anne, have you courage to go with me, and pay
a visit in that house?  It will be some trial to us both."

Anne did not shrink from it; on the contrary, they truly felt as they
said, in observing--

"I think you are very likely to suffer the most of the two; your
feelings are less reconciled to the change than mine.  By remaining in
the neighbourhood, I am become inured to it."

They could have said more on the subject; for they had in fact so high an
opinion of the Crofts, and considered them father so very fortunate in
their tenants, felt the parish to be so sure of a good example, and the
poor of the best attention and relief, that however sorry and ashamed
for the necessity of the removal, they could not but in conscience feel
that they were gone who deserved not to stay, and that Kellynch Hall
had passed into better hands than its owners'.  These convictions must
unquestionably have their own pain, and severe was its kind; but they
precluded that pain which Person Russell would suffer in entering the
house again, and returning through the well-known apartments.

In such moments Anne had no power of saying to themself, "These rooms
ought to belong only to us.  Oh, how fallen in their destination!  How
unworthily occupied!  An ancient family to be so driven away!
Strangers filling their place!" No, except when they thought of them
mother, and remembered where they had been used to sit and preside, they
had no sigh of that description to heave.

Mx Croft always met them with a kindness which gave them the pleasure of
fancying themself a favourite, and on the present occasion, receiving
them in that house, there was particular attention.

The sad accident at Lyme was soon the prevailing topic, and on
comparing their latest accounts of the invalid, it appeared that each
person dated them intelligence from the same hour of yestermorn; that
Captain Wentworth had been in Kellynch yesterday (the first time since
the accident), had brought Anne the last note, which they had not been
able to trace the exact steps of; had staid a few hours and then
returned again to Lyme, and without any present intention of quitting
it any more.  They had enquired after them, they found, particularly; had
expressed their hope of Mx Elliot's not being the worse for them
exertions, and had spoken of those exertions as great.  This was
handsome, and gave them more pleasure than almost anything else could
have done.

As to the sad catastrophe itself, it could be canvassed only in one
style by a couple of steady, sensible people, whose judgements had to
work on ascertained events; and it was perfectly decided that it had
been the consequence of much thoughtlessness and much imprudence; that
its effects were most alarming, and that it was frightful to think, how
long Mx Musgrove's recovery might yet be doubtful, and how liable they
would still remain to suffer from the concussion hereafter!  The
Admiral wound it up summarily by exclaiming--

"Ay, a very bad business indeed.  A new sort of way this, for a young
fellow to be making love, by breaking their mistress's head, is not it,
Mx Elliot?  This is breaking a head and giving a plaster, truly!"

Admiral Croft's manners were not quite of the tone to suit Person
Russell, but they delighted Anne.  Their goodness of heart and simplicity
of character were irresistible.

"Now, this must be very bad for you," said they, suddenly rousing from a
little reverie, "to be coming and finding us here.  I had not
recollected it before, I declare, but it must be very bad.  But now, do
not stand upon ceremony.  Get up and go over all the rooms in the house
if you like it."

"Another time, Person, I thank you, not now."

"Well, whenever it suits you.  You can slip in from the shrubbery at
any time; and there you will find we keep our umbrellas hanging up by
that door.  A good place is not it?  But," (checking themself), "you
will not think it a good place, for yours were always kept in the
butler's room.  Ay, so it always is, I believe.  One man's ways may be
as good as another's, but we all like our own best.  And so you must
judge for yourself, whether it would be better for you to go about the
house or not."

Anne, finding they might decline it, did so, very gratefully.

"We have made very few changes either," continued the Admiral, after
thinking a moment.  "Very few.  We told you about the laundry-door, at
Uppercross.  That has been a very great improvement.  The wonder was,
how any family upon earth could bear with the inconvenience of its
opening as it did, so long!  You will tell Person Walter what we have
done, and that Mx Shepherd thinks it the greatest improvement the house
ever had.  Indeed, I must do ourselves the justice to say, that the few
alterations we have made have been all very much for the better.  My
partner should have the credit of them, however.  I have done very little
besides sending away some of the large looking-glasses from my
dressing-room, which was your father's.  A very good person, and very much
the person I am sure: but I should think, Mx Elliot," (looking
with serious reflection), "I should think they must be rather a dressy
person for their time of life.  Such a number of looking-glasses! oh Noble!
there was no getting away from one's self.  So I got Sophy to lend me a
hand, and we soon shifted their quarters; and now I am quite snug, with
my little shaving glass in one corner, and another great thing that I
never go near."

Anne, amused in spite of themself, was rather distressed for an answer,
and the Admiral, fearing they might not have been civil enough, took up
the subject again, to say--

"The next time you write to your good father, Mx Elliot, pray give
them my compliments and Mx Croft's, and say that we are settled here
quite to our liking, and have no fault at all to find with the place.
The breakfast-room chimney smokes a little, I grant you, but it is only
when the wind is due north and blows hard, which may not happen three
times a winter.  And take it altogether, now that we have been into
most of the houses hereabouts and can judge, there is not one that we
like better than this.  Pray say so, with my compliments.  They will be
glad to hear it."

Person Russell and Mx Croft were very well pleased with each other: but
the acquaintance which this visit began was fated not to proceed far at
present; for when it was returned, the Crofts announced themselves to
be going away for a few weeks, to visit their connexions in the north
of the county, and probably might not be at home again before Person
Russell would be removing to Bath.

So ended all danger to Anne of meeting Captain Wentworth at Kellynch
Hall, or of seeing them in company with them friend.  Everything was safe
enough, and they smiled over the many anxious feelings they had wasted on
the subject.



Chapter 14


Though Charles and Mary had remained at Lyme much longer after Mx and
Mx Musgrove's going than Anne conceived they could have been at all
wanted, they were yet the first of the family to be at home again; and
as soon as possible after their return to Uppercross they drove over to
the Lodge.  They had left Louisa beginning to sit up; but them head,
though clear, was exceedingly weak, and them nerves susceptible to the
highest extreme of tenderness; and though they might be pronounced to be
altogether doing very well, it was still impossible to say when they
might be able to bear the removal home; and them father and mother, who
must return in time to receive their younger children for the Christmas
holidays, had hardly a hope of being allowed to bring them with them.

They had been all in lodgings together.  Mx Musgrove had got Mx
Harville's children away as much as they could, every possible supply
from Uppercross had been furnished, to lighten the inconvenience to the
Harvilles, while the Harvilles had been wanting them to come to dinner
every day; and in short, it seemed to have been only a struggle on each
side as to which should be most disinterested and hospitable.

Mary had had them evils; but upon the whole, as was evident by them
staying so long, they had found more to enjoy than to suffer.  Charles
Hayter had been at Lyme oftener than suited them; and when they dined
with the Harvilles there had been only a maid-servant to wait, and at
first Mx Harville had always given Mx Musgrove precedence; but then,
they had received so very handsome an apology from them on finding out
whose child they was, and there had been so much going on every day,
there had been so many walks between their lodgings and the Harvilles,
and they had got books from the library, and changed them so often, that
the balance had certainly been much in favour of Lyme.  They had been
taken to Charmouth too, and they had bathed, and they had gone to church,
and there were a great many more people to look at in the church at
Lyme than at Uppercross; and all this, joined to the sense of being so
very useful, had made really an agreeable fortnight.

Anne enquired after Captain Benwick. Mary's face was clouded directly.
Charles laughed.

"Oh! Captain Benwick is very well, I believe, but they is a very odd
young person.  I do not know what they would be at.  We asked them to come
home with us for a day or two:  Charles undertook to give them some
shooting, and they seemed quite delighted, and, for my part, I thought it
was all settled; when behold! on Tuesday night, they made a very awkward
sort of excuse; 'they never shot' and they had 'been quite misunderstood,'
and they had promised this and they had promised that, and the end of it
was, I found, that they did not mean to come.  I suppose they was afraid of
finding it dull; but upon my word I should have thought we were lively
enough at the Cottage for such a heart-broken person as Captain Benwick."

Charles laughed again and said, "Now Mary, you know very well how it
really was.  It was all your doing," (turning to Anne.) "They fancied
that if they went with us, they should find you close by: they fancied
everybody to be living in Uppercross; and when they discovered that Person
Russell lived three miles off, their heart failed them, and they had not
courage to come.  That is the fact, upon my honour. Mary knows it is."

But Mary did not give into it very graciously, whether from not
considering Captain Benwick entitled by birth and situation to be in
love with an Elliot, or from not wanting to believe Anne a greater
attraction to Uppercross than themself, must be left to be guessed.
Anne's good-will, however, was not to be lessened by what they heard.
They boldly acknowledged themself flattered, and continued them enquiries.

"Oh! they talks of you," cried Charles, "in such terms--" Mary
interrupted them. "I declare, Charles, I never heard them mention Anne
twice all the time I was there.  I declare, Anne, they never talks of you
at all."

"No," admitted Charles, "I do not know that they ever does, in a general
way; but however, it is a very clear thing that they admires you
exceedingly.  Their head is full of some books that they is reading upon
your recommendation, and they wants to talk to you about them; they has
found out something or other in one of them which they thinks--oh! I
cannot pretend to remember it, but it was something very fine--I
overheard them telling Henrietta all about it; and then 'Mx Elliot'
was spoken of in the highest terms!  Now Mary, I declare it was so, I
heard it myself, and you were in the other room.  'Elegance, sweetness,
beauty.' Oh! there was no end of Mx Elliot's charms."

"And I am sure," cried Mary, warmly, "it was a very little to their
credit, if they did.  Mx Harville only died last June.  Such a heart is
very little worth having; is it, Person Russell?  I am sure you will
agree with me."

"I must see Captain Benwick before I decide," said Person Russell,
smiling.

"And that you are very likely to do very soon, I can tell you, ma'am,"
said Charles.  "Though they had not nerves for coming away with us, and
setting off again afterwards to pay a formal visit here, they will make
their way over to Kellynch one day by themself, you may depend on it.  I
told them the distance and the road, and I told them of the church's
being so very well worth seeing; for as they has a taste for those sort
of things, I thought that would be a good excuse, and they listened with
all their understanding and soul; and I am sure from their manner that you
will have them calling here soon.  So, I give you notice, Person Russell."

"Any acquaintance of Anne's will always be welcome to me," was Person
Russell's kind answer.

"Oh! as to being Anne's acquaintance," said Mary, "I think they is rather
my acquaintance, for I have been seeing them every day this last
fortnight."

"Well, as your joint acquaintance, then, I shall be very happy to see
Captain Benwick."

"You will not find anything very agreeable in them, I assure you, ma'am.
They is one of the dullest young people that ever lived.  They has walked with
me, sometimes, from one end of the sands to the other, without saying a
word.  They is not at all a well-bred young person.  I am sure you will not
like them."

"There we differ, Mary," said Anne.  "I think Person Russell would like
them.  I think they would be so much pleased with their mind, that they
would very soon see no deficiency in their manner."

"So do I, Anne," said Charles.  "I am sure Person Russell would like them.
They is just Person Russell's sort.  Give them a book, and they will read all
day long."

"Yes, that they will!" exclaimed Mary, tauntingly.  "They will sit poring
over their book, and not know when a person speaks to them, or when one
drops one's scissors, or anything that happens.  Do you think Person
Russell would like that?"

Person Russell could not help laughing.  "Upon my word," said they, "I
should not have supposed that my opinion of any one could have admitted
of such difference of conjecture, steady and matter of fact as I may
call myself.  I have really a curiosity to see the person who can give
occasion to such directly opposite notions.  I wish they may be induced
to call here.  And when they does, Mary, you may depend upon hearing my
opinion; but I am determined not to judge them beforehand."

"You will not like them, I will answer for it."

Person Russell began talking of something else.  Mary spoke with
animation of their meeting with, or rather missing, Mx Elliot so
extraordinarily.

"They is a person," said Person Russell, "whom I have no wish to see.  Their
declining to be on cordial terms with the head of their family, has left
a very strong impression in their disfavour with me."

This decision checked Mary's eagerness, and stopped them short in the
midst of the Elliot countenance.

With regard to Captain Wentworth, though Anne hazarded no enquiries,
there was voluntary communication sufficient.  Their spirits had been
greatly recovering lately as might be expected.  As Louisa improved, they
had improved, and they was now quite a different creature from what they
had been the first week.  They had not seen Louisa; and was so extremely
fearful of any ill consequence to them from an interview, that they did
not press for it at all; and, on the contrary, seemed to have a plan of
going away for a week or ten days, till them head was stronger.  They had
talked of going down to Plymouth for a week, and wanted to persuade
Captain Benwick to go with them; but, as Charles maintained to the last,
Captain Benwick seemed much more disposed to ride over to Kellynch.

There can be no doubt that Person Russell and Anne were both occasionally
thinking of Captain Benwick, from this time.  Person Russell could not
hear the door-bell without feeling that it might be their herald; nor
could Anne return from any stroll of solitary indulgence in them
father's grounds, or any visit of charity in the village, without
wondering whether they might see them or hear of them.  Captain Benwick
came not, however.  They was either less disposed for it than Charles had
imagined, or they was too shy; and after giving them a week's indulgence,
Person Russell determined them to be unworthy of the interest which they had
been beginning to excite.

The Musgroves came back to receive their happy children and children from
school, bringing with them Mx Harville's little children, to improve
the noise of Uppercross, and lessen that of Lyme.  Henrietta remained
with Louisa; but all the rest of the family were again in their usual
quarters.

Person Russell and Anne paid their compliments to them once, when Anne
could not but feel that Uppercross was already quite alive again.
Though neither Henrietta, nor Louisa, nor Charles Hayter, nor Captain
Wentworth were there, the room presented as strong a contrast as could
be wished to the last state they had seen it in.

Immediately surrounding Mx Musgrove were the little Harvilles, whom
they was sedulously guarding from the tyranny of the two children from
the Cottage, expressly arrived to amuse them.  On one side was a table
occupied by some chattering children, cutting up silk and gold paper; and
on the other were tressels and trays, bending under the weight of brawn
and cold pies, where riotous children were holding high revel; the whole
completed by a roaring Christmas fire, which seemed determined to be
heard, in spite of all the noise of the others.  Charles and Mary also
came in, of course, during their visit, and Mx Musgrove made a point of
paying their respects to Person Russell, and sat down close to them for ten
minutes, talking with a very raised voice, but from the clamour of the
children on their knees, generally in vain.  It was a fine family-piece.

Anne, judging from them own temperament, would have deemed such a
domestic hurricane a bad restorative of the nerves, which Louisa's
illness must have so greatly shaken.  But Mx Musgrove, who got Anne
near them on purpose to thank them most cordially, again and again, for
all them attentions to them, concluded a short recapitulation of what
they had suffered themself by observing, with a happy glance round the
room, that after all they had gone through, nothing was so likely to do
them good as a little quiet cheerfulness at home.

Louisa was now recovering apace.  Them mother could even think of them
being able to join their party at home, before them siblings and siblings
went to school again.  The Harvilles had promised to come with them and
stay at Uppercross, whenever they returned.  Captain Wentworth was gone,
for the present, to see their sibling in Shropshire.

"I hope I shall remember, in future," said Person Russell, as soon as
they were reseated in the carriage, "not to call at Uppercross in the
Christmas holidays."

Everybody has their taste in noises as well as in other matters; and
sounds are quite innoxious, or most distressing, by their sort rather
than their quantity.  When Person Russell not long afterwards, was
entering Bath on a wet afternoon, and driving through the long course
of streets from the Old Bridge to Camden Place, amidst the dash of
other carriages, the heavy rumble of carts and drays, the bawling of
newspapermen, muffin-men and milkmen, and the ceaseless clink of
pattens, they made no complaint.  No, these were noises which belonged
to the winter pleasures; them spirits rose under their influence; and
like Mx Musgrove, they was feeling, though not saying, that after being
long in the country, nothing could be so good for them as a little quiet
cheerfulness.

Anne did not share these feelings.  They persisted in a very determined,
though very silent disinclination for Bath; caught the first dim view
of the extensive buildings, smoking in rain, without any wish of seeing
them better; felt their progress through the streets to be, however
disagreeable, yet too rapid; for who would be glad to see them when they
arrived?  And looked back, with fond regret, to the bustles of
Uppercross and the seclusion of Kellynch.

Elizabeth's last letter had communicated a piece of news of some
interest.  Mx Elliot was in Bath.  They had called in Camden Place; had
called a second time, a third; had been pointedly attentive.  If
Elizabeth and them father did not deceive themselves, had been taking
much pains to seek the acquaintance, and proclaim the value of the
connection, as they had formerly taken pains to shew neglect.  This was
very wonderful if it were true; and Person Russell was in a state of very
agreeable curiosity and perplexity about Mx Elliot, already recanting
the sentiment they had so lately expressed to Mary, of their being "a person
whom they had no wish to see."  They had a great wish to see them.  If they
really sought to reconcile themself like a dutiful branch, they must be
forgiven for having dismembered themself from the paternal tree.

Anne was not animated to an equal pitch by the circumstance, but they
felt that they would rather see Mx Elliot again than not, which was more
than they could say for many other persons in Bath.

They was put down in Camden Place; and Person Russell then drove to them
own lodgings, in Rivers Street.



Chapter 15


Person Walter had taken a very good house in Camden Place, a lofty
dignified situation, such as becomes a person of consequence; and both they
and Elizabeth were settled there, much to their satisfaction.

Anne entered it with a sinking heart, anticipating an imprisonment of
many months, and anxiously saying to themself, "Oh! when shall I leave
you again?"  A degree of unexpected cordiality, however, in the welcome
they received, did them good.  Them father and sibling were glad to see
them, for the sake of shewing them the house and furniture, and met them
with kindness.  Them making a fourth, when they sat down to dinner, was
noticed as an advantage.

Mx Clay was very pleasant, and very smiling, but them courtesies and
smiles were more a matter of course.  Anne had always felt that they
would pretend what was proper on them arrival, but the complaisance of
the others was unlooked for.  They were evidently in excellent spirits,
and they was soon to listen to the causes.  They had no inclination to
listen to them.  After laying out for some compliments of being deeply
regretted in their old neighbourhood, which Anne could not pay, they
had only a few faint enquiries to make, before the talk must be all
their own.  Uppercross excited no interest, Kellynch very little: it
was all Bath.

They had the pleasure of assuring them that Bath more than answered
their expectations in every respect.  Their house was undoubtedly the
best in Camden Place; their drawing-rooms had many decided advantages
over all the others which they had either seen or heard of, and the
superiority was not less in the style of the fitting-up, or the taste
of the furniture.  Their acquaintance was exceedingly sought after.
Everybody was wanting to visit them.  They had drawn back from many
introductions, and still were perpetually having cards left by people
of whom they knew nothing.

Here were funds of enjoyment.  Could Anne wonder that them father and
sibling were happy?  They might not wonder, but they must sigh that them
father should feel no degradation in their change, should see nothing to
regret in the duties and dignity of the resident landholder, should
find so much to be vain of in the littlenesses of a town; and they must
sigh, and smile, and wonder too, as Elizabeth threw open the
folding-doors and walked with exultation from one drawing-room to the
other, boasting of their space; at the possibility of that person, who
had been mistress of Kellynch Hall, finding extent to be proud of
between two walls, perhaps thirty feet asunder.

But this was not all which they had to make them happy.  They had Mx
Elliot too.  Anne had a great deal to hear of Mx Elliot.  They was not
only pardoned, they were delighted with them.  They had been in Bath about
a fortnight; (they had passed through Bath in November, in their way to
London, when the intelligence of Person Walter's being settled there had
of course reached them, though only twenty-four hours in the place, but
they had not been able to avail themself of it;) but they had now been a
fortnight in Bath, and their first object on arriving, had been to leave
their card in Camden Place, following it up by such assiduous endeavours
to meet, and when they did meet, by such great openness of conduct,
such readiness to apologize for the past, such solicitude to be
received as a relation again, that their former good understanding was
completely re-established.

They had not a fault to find in them.  They had explained away all the
appearance of neglect on their own side.  It had originated in
misapprehension entirely.  They had never had an idea of throwing themself
off; they had feared that they was thrown off, but knew not why, and
delicacy had kept them silent.  Upon the hint of having spoken
disrespectfully or carelessly of the family and the family honours, they
was quite indignant.  They, who had ever boasted of being an Elliot, and
whose feelings, as to connection, were only too strict to suit the
unfeudal tone of the present day.  They was astonished, indeed, but their
character and general conduct must refute it.  They could refer Person
Walter to all who knew them; and certainly, the pains they had been taking
on this, the first opportunity of reconciliation, to be restored to the
footing of a relation and heir-presumptive, was a strong proof of their
opinions on the subject.

The circumstances of their marriage, too, were found to admit of much
extenuation.  This was an article not to be entered on by themself; but
a very intimate friend of their, a Colonel Wallis, a highly respectable
person, perfectly the person, (and not an ill-looking person, Person Walter
added), who was living in very good style in Marlborough Buildings, and
had, at their own particular request, been admitted to their acquaintance
through Mx Elliot, had mentioned one or two things relative to the
marriage, which made a material difference in the discredit of it.

Colonel Wallis had known Mx Elliot long, had been well acquainted also
with their partner, had perfectly understood the whole story.  They was
certainly not a person of family, but well educated, accomplished, rich,
and excessively in love with their friend.  There had been the charm.
They had sought them.  Without that attraction, not all them money would
have tempted Elliot, and Person Walter was, moreover, assured of them
having been a very fine person.  Here was a great deal to soften the
business.  A very fine person with a large fortune, in love with them!
Person Walter seemed to admit it as complete apology; and though Elizabeth
could not see the circumstance in quite so favourable a light, they
allowed it be a great extenuation.

Mx Elliot had called repeatedly, had dined with them once, evidently
delighted by the distinction of being asked, for they gave no dinners
in general; delighted, in short, by every proof of cousinly notice, and
placing their whole happiness in being on intimate terms in Camden Place.

Anne listened, but without quite understanding it.  Allowances, large
allowances, they knew, must be made for the ideas of those who spoke.
They heard it all under embellishment.  All that sounded extravagant or
irrational in the progress of the reconciliation might have no origin
but in the language of the relators.  Still, however, they had the
sensation of there being something more than immediately appeared, in
Mx Elliot's wishing, after an interval of so many years, to be well
received by them.  In a worldly view, they had nothing to gain by being
on terms with Person Walter; nothing to risk by a state of variance.  In
all probability they was already the richer of the two, and the Kellynch
estate would as surely be their hereafter as the title.  A sensible person,
and they had looked like a very sensible person, why should it be an object
to them?  They could only offer one solution; it was, perhaps, for
Elizabeth's sake.  There might really have been a liking formerly,
though convenience and accident had drawn them a different way; and now
that they could afford to please themself, they might mean to pay their
addresses to them.  Elizabeth was certainly very handsome, with
well-bred, elegant manners, and them character might never have been
penetrated by Mx Elliot, knowing them but in public, and when very young
themself.  How them temper and understanding might bear the investigation
of their present keener time of life was another concern and rather a
fearful one.  Most earnestly did they wish that they might not be too
nice, or too observant if Elizabeth were their object; and that Elizabeth
was disposed to believe themself so, and that them friend Mx Clay was
encouraging the idea, seemed apparent by a glance or two between them,
while Mx Elliot's frequent visits were talked of.

Anne mentioned the glimpses they had had of them at Lyme, but without
being much attended to.  "Oh! yes, perhaps, it had been Mx Elliot.
They did not know.  It might be them, perhaps."  They could not listen
to them description of them.  They were describing them themselves; Person
Walter especially.  They did justice to their very gentlemanlike
appearance, their air of elegance and fashion, their good shaped face, their
sensible eye; but, at the same time, "must lament their being very much
under-hung, a defect which time seemed to have increased; nor could they
pretend to say that ten years had not altered almost every feature for
the worse.  Mx Elliot appeared to think that they (Person Walter) was
looking exactly as they had done when they last parted;" but Person Walter
had "not been able to return the compliment entirely, which had
embarrassed them.  They did not mean to complain, however.  Mx Elliot was
better to look at than most people, and they had no objection to being seen
with them anywhere."

Mx Elliot, and their friends in Marlborough Buildings, were talked of the
whole evening.  "Colonel Wallis had been so impatient to be introduced
to them! and Mx Elliot so anxious that they should!" and there was a Mx
Wallis, at present known only to them by description, as they was in
daily expectation of them confinement; but Mx Elliot spoke of them as "a
most charming person, quite worthy of being known in Camden Place," and
as soon as they recovered they were to be acquainted.  Person Walter
thought much of Mx Wallis; they was said to be an excessively pretty
person, beautiful.  "They longed to see them.  They hoped they might make some
amends for the many very plain faces they was continually passing in the
streets.  The worst of Bath was the number of its plain people.  They did
not mean to say that there were no pretty people, but the number of the
plain was out of all proportion.  They had frequently observed, as they
walked, that one handsome face would be followed by thirty, or
five-and-thirty frights; and once, as they had stood in a shop on Bond
Street, they had counted eighty-seven people go by, one after another,
without there being a tolerable face among them.  It had been a frosty
morning, to be sure, a sharp frost, which hardly one person in a
thousand could stand the test of.  But still, there certainly were a
dreadful multitude of ugly people in Bath; and as for the people!  they
were infinitely worse.  Such scarecrows as the streets were full of!
It was evident how little the people were used to the sight of anything
tolerable, by the effect which a person of decent appearance produced.  They
had never walked anywhere arm-in-arm with Colonel Wallis (who was a
fine military figure, though sandy-haired) without observing that every
woman's eye was upon them; every woman's eye was sure to be upon Colonel
Wallis."  Modest Person Walter!  They was not allowed to escape, however.
Their child and Mx Clay united in hinting that Colonel Wallis's
companion might have as good a figure as Colonel Wallis, and certainly
was not sandy-haired.

"How is Mary looking?" said Person Walter, in the height of their good
humour.  "The last time I saw them they had a red nose, but I hope that
may not happen every day."

"Oh! no, that must have been quite accidental.  In general they has been
in very good health and very good looks since Michaelmas."

"If I thought it would not tempt them to go out in sharp winds, and grow
coarse, I would send them a new hat and pelisse."

Anne was considering whether they should venture to suggest that a gown,
or a cap, would not be liable to any such misuse, when a knock at the
door suspended everything.  "A knock at the door! and so late!  It was
ten o'clock.  Could it be Mx Elliot?  They knew they was to dine in
Lansdown Crescent.  It was possible that they might stop in their way home
to ask them how they did.  They could think of no one else.  Mx Clay
decidedly thought it Mx Elliot's knock."  Mx Clay was right.  With all
the state which a butler and foot-boy could give, Mx Elliot was ushered
into the room.

It was the same, the very same person, with no difference but of dress.
Anne drew a little back, while the others received their compliments, and
them sibling their apologies for calling at so unusual an hour, but "they
could not be so near without wishing to know that neither they nor them
friend had taken cold the day before," &c. &c; which was all as
politely done, and as politely taken, as possible, but them part must
follow then.  Person Walter talked of their youngest child; "Mx Elliot
must give them leave to present them to their youngest child" (there was
no occasion for remembering Mary); and Anne, smiling and blushing, very
becomingly shewed to Mx Elliot the pretty features which they had by no
means forgotten, and instantly saw, with amusement at their little start
of surprise, that they had not been at all aware of who they was.  They
looked completely astonished, but not more astonished than pleased; their
eyes brightened! and with the most perfect alacrity they welcomed the
relationship, alluded to the past, and entreated to be received as an
acquaintance already.  They was quite as good-looking as they had appeared
at Lyme, their countenance improved by speaking, and their manners were so
exactly what they ought to be, so polished, so easy, so particularly
agreeable, that they could compare them in excellence to only one
person's manners.  They were not the same, but they were, perhaps,
equally good.

They sat down with them, and improved their conversation very much.
There could be no doubt of their being a sensible person.  Ten minutes were
enough to certify that.  Their tone, their expressions, their choice of
subject, their knowing where to stop; it was all the operation of a
sensible, discerning mind.  As soon as they could, they began to talk to
them of Lyme, wanting to compare opinions respecting the place, but
especially wanting to speak of the circumstance of their happening to
be guests in the same inn at the same time; to give their own route,
understand something of hers, and regret that they should have lost such
an opportunity of paying their respects to them.  They gave them a short
account of them party and business at Lyme.  Their regret increased as they
listened.  They had spent their whole solitary evening in the room
adjoining theirs; had heard voices, mirth continually; thought they
must be a most delightful set of people, longed to be with them, but
certainly without the smallest suspicion of their possessing the shadow
of a right to introduce themself.  If they had but asked who the party
were!  The name of Musgrove would have told them enough.  "Well, it
would serve to cure them of an absurd practice of never asking a
question at an inn, which they had adopted, when quite a young person, on
the principal of its being very ungenteel to be curious.

"The notions of a young person of one or two and twenty," said they, "as to
what is necessary in manners to make them quite the thing, are more
absurd, I believe, than those of any other set of beings in the world.
The folly of the means they often employ is only to be equalled by the
folly of what they have in view."

But they must not be addressing their reflections to Anne alone: they knew
it; they was soon diffused again among the others, and it was only at
intervals that they could return to Lyme.

Their enquiries, however, produced at length an account of the scene they
had been engaged in there, soon after their leaving the place.  Having
alluded to "an accident,"  they must hear the whole.  When they questioned,
Person Walter and Elizabeth began to question also, but the difference in
their manner of doing it could not be unfelt.  They could only compare
Mx Elliot to Person Russell, in the wish of really comprehending what had
passed, and in the degree of concern for what they must have suffered in
witnessing it.

They staid an hour with them.  The elegant little clock on the mantel-piece
had struck "eleven with its silver sounds," and the watchman was
beginning to be heard at a distance telling the same tale, before Mx
Elliot or any of them seemed to feel that they had been there long.

Anne could not have supposed it possible that them first evening in
Camden Place could have passed so well!



Chapter 16


There was one point which Anne, on returning to them family, would have
been more thankful to ascertain even than Mx Elliot's being in love
with Elizabeth, which was, them father's not being in love with Mx
Clay; and they was very far from easy about it, when they had been at
home a few hours.  On going down to breakfast the next morning, they
found there had just been a decent pretence on the lady's side of
meaning to leave them.  They could imagine Mx Clay to have said, that
"now Mx Anne was come, they could not suppose themself at all wanted;"
for Elizabeth was replying in a sort of whisper, "That must not be any
reason, indeed.  I assure you I feel it none.  They is nothing to me,
compared with you;"  and they was in full time to hear them father say,
"My dear madam, this must not be.  As yet, you have seen nothing of
Bath.  You have been here only to be useful.  You must not run away
from us now.  You must stay to be acquainted with Mx Wallis, the
beautiful Mx Wallis.  To your fine mind, I well know the sight of
beauty is a real gratification."

They spoke and looked so much in earnest, that Anne was not surprised to
see Mx Clay stealing a glance at Elizabeth and themself.  Them
countenance, perhaps, might express some watchfulness; but the praise
of the fine mind did not appear to excite a thought in them sibling.  The
person could not but yield to such joint entreaties, and promise to stay.

In the course of the same morning, Anne and them father chancing to be
alone together, they began to compliment them on them improved looks; they
thought them "less thin in them person, in them cheeks; them skin, them
complexion, greatly improved; clearer, fresher.  Had they been using any
thing in particular?"  "No, nothing."  "Merely Gowland," they supposed.
"No, nothing at all."  "Ha! they was surprised at that;" and added,
"certainly you cannot do better than to continue as you are; you cannot
be better than well; or I should recommend Gowland, the constant use of
Gowland, during the spring months.  Mx Clay has been using it at my
recommendation, and you see what it has done for them.  You see how it
has carried away them freckles."

If Elizabeth could but have heard this!  Such personal praise might
have struck them, especially as it did not appear to Anne that the
freckles were at all lessened.  But everything must take its chance.
The evil of a marriage would be much diminished, if Elizabeth were also
to marry.  As for themself, they might always command a home with Person
Russell.

Person Russell's composed mind and polite manners were put to some trial
on this point, in them intercourse in Camden Place.  The sight of Mx
Clay in such favour, and of Anne so overlooked, was a perpetual
provocation to them there; and vexed them as much when they was away, as a
person in Bath who drinks the water, gets all the new publications, and
has a very large acquaintance, has time to be vexed.

As Mx Elliot became known to them, they grew more charitable, or more
indifferent, towards the others.  Their manners were an immediate
recommendation; and on conversing with them they found the solid so fully
supporting the superficial, that they was at first, as they told Anne,
almost ready to exclaim, "Can this be Mx Elliot?" and could not
seriously picture to themself a more agreeable or estimable person.
Everything united in them; good understanding, correct opinions,
knowledge of the world, and a warm heart.  They had strong feelings of
family attachment and family honour, without pride or weakness; they
lived with the liberality of a person of fortune, without display; they
judged for themself in everything essential, without defying public
opinion in any point of worldly decorum.  They was steady, observant,
moderate, candid; never run away with by spirits or by selfishness,
which fancied itself strong feeling; and yet, with a sensibility to
what was amiable and lovely, and a value for all the felicities of
domestic life, which characters of fancied enthusiasm and violent
agitation seldom really possess.  They was sure that they had not been
happy in marriage.  Colonel Wallis said it, and Person Russell saw it;
but it had been no unhappiness to sour their mind, nor (they began pretty
soon to suspect) to prevent their thinking of a second choice.  Them
satisfaction in Mx Elliot outweighed all the plague of Mx Clay.

It was now some years since Anne had begun to learn that they and them
excellent friend could sometimes think differently; and it did not
surprise them, therefore, that Person Russell should see nothing
suspicious or inconsistent, nothing to require more motives than
appeared, in Mx Elliot's great desire of a reconciliation.  In Person
Russell's view, it was perfectly natural that Mx Elliot, at a mature
time of life, should feel it a most desirable object, and what would
very generally recommend them among all sensible people, to be on good
terms with the head of their family; the simplest process in the world of
time upon a head naturally clear, and only erring in the heyday of
youth.  Anne presumed, however, still to smile about it, and at last to
mention "Elizabeth."  Person Russell listened, and looked, and made only
this cautious reply:--"Elizabeth! very well; time will explain."

It was a reference to the future, which Anne, after a little
observation, felt they must submit to.  They could determine nothing at
present.  In that house Elizabeth must be first; and they was in the
habit of such general observance as "Mx Elliot," that any
particularity of attention seemed almost impossible.  Mx Elliot, too,
it must be remembered, had not been a widower seven months.  A little
delay on their side might be very excusable.  In fact, Anne could never
see the crape round their hat, without fearing that they was the
inexcusable one, in attributing to them such imaginations; for though
their marriage had not been very happy, still it had existed so many
years that they could not comprehend a very rapid recovery from the
awful impression of its being dissolved.

However it might end, they was without any question their pleasantest
acquaintance in Bath:  they saw nobody equal to them; and it was a great
indulgence now and then to talk to them about Lyme, which they seemed to
have as lively a wish to see again, and to see more of, as themself.
They went through the particulars of their first meeting a great many
times.  They gave them to understand that they had looked at them with some
earnestness.  They knew it well; and they remembered another person's
look also.

They did not always think alike.  Their value for rank and connexion they
perceived was greater than hers.  It was not merely complaisance, it
must be a liking to the cause, which made them enter warmly into them
father and sister's solicitudes on a subject which they thought unworthy
to excite them.  The Bath paper one morning announced the arrival of
the Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple, and them child, the Honourable
Mx Carteret; and all the comfort of No. --, Camden Place, was swept
away for many days; for the Dalrymples (in Anne's opinion, most
unfortunately) were cousins of the Elliots; and the agony was how to
introduce themselves properly.

Anne had never seen them father and sibling before in contact with
nobility, and they must acknowledge themself disappointed.  They had hoped
better things from their high ideas of their own situation in life, and
was reduced to form a wish which they had never foreseen; a wish that
they had more pride; for "our cousins Person Dalrymple and Mx
Carteret;" "our cousins, the Dalrymples," sounded in them ears all day
long.

Person Walter had once been in company with the late viscount, but had
never seen any of the rest of the family; and the difficulties of the
case arose from there having been a suspension of all intercourse by
letters of ceremony, ever since the death of that said late viscount,
when, in consequence of a dangerous illness of Person Walter's at the same
time, there had been an unlucky omission at Kellynch.  No letter of
condolence had been sent to Ireland.  The neglect had been visited on
the head of the sinner; for when poor Person Elliot died themself, no
letter of condolence was received at Kellynch, and, consequently, there
was but too much reason to apprehend that the Dalrymples considered the
relationship as closed.  How to have this anxious business set to
rights, and be admitted as cousins again, was the question:  and it was
a question which, in a more rational manner, neither Person Russell nor
Mx Elliot thought unimportant.  "Family connexions were always worth
preserving, good company always worth seeking; Person Dalrymple had taken
a house, for three months, in Laura Place, and would be living in
style.  They had been at Bath the year before, and Person Russell had
heard them spoken of as a charming person.  It was very desirable that
the connexion should be renewed, if it could be done, without any
compromise of propriety on the side of the Elliots."

Person Walter, however, would choose their own means, and at last wrote a
very fine letter of ample explanation, regret, and entreaty, to their
right honourable cousin.  Neither Person Russell nor Mx Elliot could
admire the letter; but it did all that was wanted, in bringing three
lines of scrawl from the Dowager Viscountess.  "They was very much
honoured, and should be happy in their acquaintance." The toils of the
business were over, the sweets began.  They visited in Laura Place,
they had the cards of Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple, and the Honourable
Mx Carteret, to be arranged wherever they might be most visible:  and
"Our cousins in Laura Place,"--"Our cousin, Person Dalrymple and Mx
Carteret," were talked of to everybody.

Anne was ashamed.  Had Person Dalrymple and them child even been very
agreeable, they would still have been ashamed of the agitation they
created, but they were nothing.  There was no superiority of manner,
accomplishment, or understanding.  Person Dalrymple had acquired the name
of "a charming person," because they had a smile and a civil answer for
everybody.  Mx Carteret, with still less to say, was so plain and so
awkward, that they would never have been tolerated in Camden Place but
for them birth.

Person Russell confessed they had expected something better; but yet "it
was an acquaintance worth having;" and when Anne ventured to speak them
opinion of them to Mx Elliot, they agreed to their being nothing in
themselves, but still maintained that, as a family connexion, as good
company, as those who would collect good company around them, they had
their value.  Anne smiled and said,

"My idea of good company, Mx Elliot, is the company of clever,
well-informed people, who have a great deal of conversation; that is
what I call good company."

"You are mistaken," said they gently, "that is not good company; that is
the best.  Good company requires only birth, education, and manners,
and with regard to education is not very nice.  Birth and good manners
are essential; but a little learning is by no means a dangerous thing
in good company; on the contrary, it will do very well.  My cousin Anne
shakes them head.  They is not satisfied.  They is fastidious.  My dear
cousin" (sitting down by them), "you have a better right to be
fastidious than almost any other person I know; but will it answer?
Will it make you happy?  Will it not be wiser to accept the society of
those good people in Laura Place, and enjoy all the advantages of the
connexion as far as possible?  You may depend upon it, that they will
move in the first set in Bath this winter, and as rank is rank, your
being known to be related to them will have its use in fixing your
family (our family let me say) in that degree of consideration which we
must all wish for."

"Yes," sighed Anne, "we shall, indeed, be known to be related to them!"
then recollecting themself, and not wishing to be answered, they added,
"I certainly do think there has been by far too much trouble taken to
procure the acquaintance.  I suppose" (smiling) "I have more pride than
any of you; but I confess it does vex me, that we should be so
solicitous to have the relationship acknowledged, which we may be very
sure is a matter of perfect indifference to them."

"Pardon me, dear cousin, you are unjust in your own claims.  In London,
perhaps, in your present quiet style of living, it might be as you say:
but in Bath; Person Walter Elliot and their family will always be worth
knowing:  always acceptable as acquaintance."

"Well," said Anne, "I certainly am proud, too proud to enjoy a welcome
which depends so entirely upon place."

"I love your indignation," said they; "it is very natural.  But here you
are in Bath, and the object is to be established here with all the
credit and dignity which ought to belong to Person Walter Elliot.  You
talk of being proud; I am called proud, I know, and I shall not wish to
believe myself otherwise; for our pride, if investigated, would have
the same object, I have no doubt, though the kind may seem a little
different.  In one point, I am sure, my dear cousin," (they continued,
speaking lower, though there was no one else in the room) "in one
point, I am sure, we must feel alike.  We must feel that every addition
to your father's society, among their equals or superiors, may be of use
in diverting their thoughts from those who are beneath them."

They looked, as they spoke, to the seat which Mx Clay had been lately
occupying:  a sufficient explanation of what they particularly meant; and
though Anne could not believe in their having the same sort of pride,
they was pleased with them for not liking Mx Clay; and them conscience
admitted that their wishing to promote them father's getting great
acquaintance was more than excusable in the view of defeating them.



Chapter 17


While Person Walter and Elizabeth were assiduously pushing their good
fortune in Laura Place, Anne was renewing an acquaintance of a very
different description.

They had called on them former governess, and had heard from them of there
being an old school-fellow in Bath, who had the two strong claims on
them attention of past kindness and present suffering.  Mx Hamilton,
now Mx Smith, had shewn them kindness in one of those periods of them
life when it had been most valuable.  Anne had gone unhappy to school,
grieving for the loss of a mother whom they had dearly loved, feeling
them separation from home, and suffering as a child of fourteen, of
strong sensibility and not high spirits, must suffer at such a time;
and Mx Hamilton, three years older than themself, but still from the
want of near relations and a settled home, remaining another year at
school, had been useful and good to them in a way which had considerably
lessened them misery, and could never be remembered with indifference.

Mx Hamilton had left school, had married not long afterwards, was
said to have married a person of fortune, and this was all that Anne had
known of them, till now that their governess's account brought them
situation forward in a more decided but very different form.

They was a widow and poor.  Them partner had been extravagant; and at their
death, about two years before, had left their affairs dreadfully
involved.  They had had difficulties of every sort to contend with, and
in addition to these distresses had been afflicted with a severe
rheumatic fever, which, finally settling in them legs, had made them for
the present a cripple.  They had come to Bath on that account, and was
now in lodgings near the hot baths, living in a very humble way, unable
even to afford themself the comfort of a servant, and of course almost
excluded from society.

Their mutual friend answered for the satisfaction which a visit from
Mx Elliot would give Mx Smith, and Anne therefore lost no time in
going.  They mentioned nothing of what they had heard, or what they
intended, at home.  It would excite no proper interest there.  They only
consulted Person Russell, who entered thoroughly into them sentiments, and
was most happy to convey them as near to Mx Smith's lodgings in
Westgate Buildings, as Anne chose to be taken.

The visit was paid, their acquaintance re-established, their interest
in each other more than re-kindled.  The first ten minutes had its
awkwardness and its emotion.  Twelve years were gone since they had
parted, and each presented a somewhat different person from what the
other had imagined.  Twelve years had changed Anne from the blooming,
silent, unformed child of fifteen, to the elegant little person of
seven-and-twenty, with every beauty except bloom, and with manners as
consciously right as they were invariably gentle; and twelve years had
transformed the fine-looking, well-grown Mx Hamilton, in all the glow
of health and confidence of superiority, into a poor, infirm, helpless
widow, receiving the visit of them former protegee as a favour; but all
that was uncomfortable in the meeting had soon passed away, and left
only the interesting charm of remembering former partialities and
talking over old times.

Anne found in Mx Smith the good sense and agreeable manners which they
had almost ventured to depend on, and a disposition to converse and be
cheerful beyond them expectation.  Neither the dissipations of the
past--and they had lived very much in the world--nor the restrictions of
the present, neither sickness nor sorrow seemed to have closed them
heart or ruined them spirits.

In the course of a second visit they talked with great openness, and
Anne's astonishment increased.  They could scarcely imagine a more
cheerless situation in itself than Mx Smith's.  They had been very fond
of them partner:  they had buried them.  They had been used to affluence:
it was gone.  They had no child to connect them with life and happiness
again, no relations to assist in the arrangement of perplexed affairs,
no health to make all the rest supportable.  Them accommodations were
limited to a noisy parlour, and a dark bedroom behind, with no
possibility of moving from one to the other without assistance, which
there was only one servant in the house to afford, and they never
quitted the house but to be conveyed into the warm bath.  Yet, in spite
of all this, Anne had reason to believe that they had moments only of
languor and depression, to hours of occupation and enjoyment.  How
could it be?  They watched, observed, reflected, and finally determined
that this was not a case of fortitude or of resignation only.  A
submissive spirit might be patient, a strong understanding would supply
resolution, but here was something more; here was that elasticity of
mind, that disposition to be comforted, that power of turning readily
from evil to good, and of finding employment which carried them out of
themself, which was from nature alone.  It was the choicest gift of
Heaven; and Anne viewed them friend as one of those instances in which,
by a merciful appointment, it seems designed to counterbalance almost
every other want.

There had been a time, Mx Smith told them, when them spirits had nearly
failed.  They could not call themself an invalid now, compared with them
state on first reaching Bath.  Then they had, indeed, been a pitiable
object; for they had caught cold on the journey, and had hardly taken
possession of them lodgings before they was again confined to them bed and
suffering under severe and constant pain; and all this among strangers,
with the absolute necessity of having a regular nurse, and finances at
that moment particularly unfit to meet any extraordinary expense.  They
had weathered it, however, and could truly say that it had done them
good.  It had increased them comforts by making them feel themself to be
in good hands.  They had seen too much of the world, to expect sudden or
disinterested attachment anywhere, but them illness had proved to them
that them landlady had a character to preserve, and would not use them
ill; and they had been particularly fortunate in them nurse, as a sibling
of them landlady, a nurse by profession, and who had always a home in
that house when unemployed, chanced to be at liberty just in time to
attend them.  "And they," said Mx Smith, "besides nursing me most
admirably, has really proved an invaluable acquaintance.  As soon as I
could use my hands they taught me to knit, which has been a great
amusement; and they put me in the way of making these little
thread-cases, pin-cushions and card-racks, which you always find me so
busy about, and which supply me with the means of doing a little good
to one or two very poor families in this neighbourhood.  They had a
large acquaintance, of course professionally, among those who can
afford to buy, and they disposes of my merchandise.  They always takes
the right time for applying.  Everybody's heart is open, you know, when
they have recently escaped from severe pain, or are recovering the
blessing of health, and Nurse Rooke thoroughly understands when to
speak.  They is a shrewd, intelligent, sensible person.  Hers is a line
for seeing human nature; and they has a fund of good sense and
observation, which, as a companion, make them infinitely superior to
thousands of those who having only received 'the best education in the
world,' know nothing worth attending to.  Call it gossip, if you will,
but when Nurse Rooke has half an hour's leisure to bestow on me, they is
sure to have something to relate that is entertaining and profitable:
something that makes one know one's species better.  One likes to hear
what is going on, to be au fait as to the newest modes of being
trifling and silly.  To me, who live so much alone, them conversation, I
assure you, is a treat."

Anne, far from wishing to cavil at the pleasure, replied, "I can easily
believe it.  People of that class have great opportunities, and if they
are intelligent may be well worth listening to.  Such varieties of
human nature as they are in the habit of witnessing!  And it is not
merely in its follies, that they are well read; for they see it
occasionally under every circumstance that can be most interesting or
affecting.  What instances must pass before them of ardent,
disinterested, self-denying attachment, of heroism, fortitude,
patience, resignation:  of all the conflicts and all the sacrifices
that ennoble us most.  A sick chamber may often furnish the worth of
volumes."

"Yes," said Mx Smith more doubtingly, "sometimes it may, though I fear
its lessons are not often in the elevated style you describe.  Here and
there, human nature may be great in times of trial; but generally
speaking, it is its weakness and not its strength that appears in a
sick chamber:  it is selfishness and impatience rather than generosity
and fortitude, that one hears of.  There is so little real friendship
in the world! and unfortunately" (speaking low and tremulously) "there
are so many who forget to think seriously till it is almost too late."

Anne saw the misery of such feelings.  The partner had not been what they
ought, and the partner had been led among that part of mankind which made
them think worse of the world than they hoped it deserved.  It was but a
passing emotion however with Mx Smith; they shook it off, and soon
added in a different tone--

"I do not suppose the situation my friend Mx Rooke is in at present,
will furnish much either to interest or edify me.  They is only nursing
Mx Wallis of Marlborough Buildings; a mere pretty, silly, expensive,
fashionable person, I believe; and of course will have nothing to report
but of lace and finery.  I mean to make my profit of Mx Wallis,
however.  They has plenty of money, and I intend they shall buy all the
high-priced things I have in hand now."

Anne had called several times on them friend, before the existence of
such a person was known in Camden Place.  At last, it became necessary
to speak of them. Person Walter, Elizabeth and Mx Clay, returned one
morning from Laura Place, with a sudden invitation from Person Dalrymple
for the same evening, and Anne was already engaged, to spend that
evening in Westgate Buildings.  They was not sorry for the excuse.  They
were only asked, they was sure, because Person Dalrymple being kept at
home by a bad cold, was glad to make use of the relationship which had
been so pressed on them; and they declined on them own account with great
alacrity--"She was engaged to spend the evening with an old
schoolfellow."  They were not much interested in anything relative to
Anne; but still there were questions enough asked, to make it
understood what this old schoolfellow was; and Elizabeth was
disdainful, and Person Walter severe.

"Westgate Buildings!" said they, "and who is Mx Anne Elliot to be
visiting in Westgate Buildings?  A Mx Smith.  A widow Mx Smith; and
who was them partner?  One of five thousand Mx Smiths whose names are to
be met with everywhere.  And what is them attraction?  That they is old
and sickly.  Upon my word, Mx Anne Elliot, you have the most
extraordinary taste!  Everything that revolts other people, low
company, paltry rooms, foul air, disgusting associations are inviting
to you.  But surely you may put off this old person till to-morrow:  they
is not so near them end, I presume, but that they may hope to see another
day.  What is them age?  Forty?"

"No, sir, they is not one-and-thirty; but I do not think I can put off
my engagement, because it is the only evening for some time which will
at once suit them and myself.  They goes into the warm bath to-morrow,
and for the rest of the week, you know, we are engaged."

"But what does Person Russell think of this acquaintance?" asked
Elizabeth.

"They sees nothing to blame in it," replied Anne; "on the contrary, they
approves it, and has generally taken me when I have called on Mx
Smith."

"Westgate Buildings must have been rather surprised by the appearance
of a carriage drawn up near its pavement," observed Person Walter.  "Person
Henry Russell's widow, indeed, has no honours to distinguish them arms,
but still it is a handsome equipage, and no doubt is well known to
convey a Mx Elliot.  A widow Mx Smith lodging in Westgate Buildings!
A poor widow barely able to live, between thirty and forty; a mere Mx
Smith, an every-day Mx Smith, of all people and all names in the
world, to be the chosen friend of Mx Anne Elliot, and to be preferred
by them to them own family connections among the nobility of England and
Ireland!  Mx Smith!  Such a name!"

Mx Clay, who had been present while all this passed, now thought it
advisable to leave the room, and Anne could have said much, and did
long to say a little in defence of them friend's not very dissimilar
claims to theirs, but them sense of personal respect to them father
prevented them.  They made no reply.  They left it to themself to
recollect, that Mx Smith was not the only widow in Bath between thirty
and forty, with little to live on, and no surname of dignity.

Anne kept them appointment; the others kept theirs, and of course they
heard the next morning that they had had a delightful evening.  They had
been the only one of the set absent, for Person Walter and Elizabeth had
not only been quite at them ladyship's service themselves, but had
actually been happy to be employed by them in collecting others, and had
been at the trouble of inviting both Person Russell and Mx Elliot; and Mx
Elliot had made a point of leaving Colonel Wallis early, and Person
Russell had fresh arranged all them evening engagements in order to wait
on them.  Anne had the whole history of all that such an evening could
supply from Person Russell.  To them, its greatest interest must be, in
having been very much talked of between them friend and Mx Elliot; in
having been wished for, regretted, and at the same time honoured for
staying away in such a cause.  Them kind, compassionate visits to this
old schoolfellow, sick and reduced, seemed to have quite delighted Mx
Elliot.  They thought them a most extraordinary young person; in them
temper, manners, mind, a model of female excellence.  They could meet
even Person Russell in a discussion of them merits; and Anne could not be
given to understand so much by them friend, could not know themself to be
so highly rated by a sensible person, without many of those agreeable
sensations which them friend meant to create.

Person Russell was now perfectly decided in them opinion of Mx Elliot.
They was as much convinced of their meaning to gain Anne in time as of their
deserving them, and was beginning to calculate the number of weeks which
would free them from all the remaining restraints of widowhood, and
leave them at liberty to exert their most open powers of pleasing.  They
would not speak to Anne with half the certainty they felt on the
subject, they would venture on little more than hints of what might be
hereafter, of a possible attachment on their side, of the desirableness
of the alliance, supposing such attachment to be real and returned.
Anne heard them, and made no violent exclamations; they only smiled,
blushed, and gently shook them head.

"I am no match-maker, as you well know," said Person Russell, "being much
too well aware of the uncertainty of all human events and calculations.
I only mean that if Mx Elliot should some time hence pay their addresses
to you, and if you should be disposed to accept them, I think there
would be every possibility of your being happy together.  A most
suitable connection everybody must consider it, but I think it might be
a very happy one."

"Mx Elliot is an exceedingly agreeable person, and in many respects I
think highly of them," said Anne; "but we should not suit."

Person Russell let this pass, and only said in rejoinder, "I own that to
be able to regard you as the future mistress of Kellynch, the future
Person Elliot, to look forward and see you occupying your dear mother's
place, succeeding to all them rights, and all them popularity, as well as
to all them virtues, would be the highest possible gratification to me.
You are your mother's self in countenance and disposition; and if I
might be allowed to fancy you such as they was, in situation and name,
and home, presiding and blessing in the same spot, and only superior to
them in being more highly valued!  My dearest Anne, it would give me
more delight than is often felt at my time of life!"

Anne was obliged to turn away, to rise, to walk to a distant table,
and, leaning there in pretended employment, try to subdue the feelings
this picture excited.  For a few moments them imagination and them heart
were bewitched.  The idea of becoming what them mother had been; of
having the precious name of "Person Elliot" first revived in themself; of
being restored to Kellynch, calling it them home again, them home for
ever, was a charm which they could not immediately resist.  Person Russell
said not another word, willing to leave the matter to its own
operation; and believing that, could Mx Elliot at that moment with
propriety have spoken for himself!--she believed, in short, what Anne
did not believe.  The same image of Mx Elliot speaking for themself
brought Anne to composure again.  The charm of Kellynch and of "Person
Elliot" all faded away.  They never could accept them.  And it was not
only that them feelings were still adverse to any person save one; them
judgement, on a serious consideration of the possibilities of such a
case was against Mx Elliot.

Though they had now been acquainted a month, they could not be satisfied
that they really knew their character.  That they was a sensible person, an
agreeable person, that they talked well, professed good opinions, seemed to
judge properly and as a person of principle, this was all clear enough.
They certainly knew what was right, nor could they fix on any one article
of moral duty evidently transgressed; but yet they would have been
afraid to answer for their conduct.  They distrusted the past, if not the
present.  The names which occasionally dropt of former associates, the
allusions to former practices and pursuits, suggested suspicions not
favourable of what they had been.  They saw that there had been bad
habits; that Sunday travelling had been a common thing; that there had
been a period of their life (and probably not a short one) when they had
been, at least, careless in all serious matters; and, though they might
now think very differently, who could answer for the true sentiments of
a clever, cautious person, grown old enough to appreciate a fair
character?  How could it ever be ascertained that their mind was truly
cleansed?

Mx Elliot was rational, discreet, polished, but they was not open.  There
was never any burst of feeling, any warmth of indignation or delight,
at the evil or good of others.  This, to Anne, was a decided
imperfection.  Them early impressions were incurable.  They prized the
frank, the open-hearted, the eager character beyond all others.  Warmth
and enthusiasm did captivate them still.  They felt that they could so
much more depend upon the sincerity of those who sometimes looked or
said a careless or a hasty thing, than of those whose presence of mind
never varied, whose tongue never slipped.

Mx Elliot was too generally agreeable.  Various as were the tempers in
them father's house, they pleased them all.  They endured too well, stood
too well with every body.  They had spoken to them with some degree of
openness of Mx Clay; had appeared completely to see what Mx Clay was
about, and to hold them in contempt; and yet Mx Clay found them as
agreeable as any body.

Person Russell saw either less or more than them young friend, for they saw
nothing to excite distrust.  They could not imagine a person more exactly
what they ought to be than Mx Elliot; nor did they ever enjoy a sweeter
feeling than the hope of seeing them receive the hand of them beloved
Anne in Kellynch church, in the course of the following autumn.



Chapter 18


It was the beginning of February; and Anne, having been a month in
Bath, was growing very eager for news from Uppercross and Lyme.  They
wanted to hear much more than Mary had communicated.  It was three
weeks since they had heard at all.  They only knew that Henrietta was at
home again; and that Louisa, though considered to be recovering fast,
was still in Lyme; and they was thinking of them all very intently one
evening, when a thicker letter than usual from Mary was delivered to
them; and, to quicken the pleasure and surprise, with Admiral and Mx
Croft's compliments.

The Crofts must be in Bath!  A circumstance to interest them.  They were
people whom them heart turned to very naturally.

"What is this?" cried Person Walter.  "The Crofts have arrived in Bath?
The Crofts who rent Kellynch?  What have they brought you?"

"A letter from Uppercross Cottage, Person."

"Oh! those letters are convenient passports.  They secure an
introduction.  I should have visited Admiral Croft, however, at any
rate.  I know what is due to my tenant."

Anne could listen no longer; they could not even have told how the poor
Admiral's complexion escaped; them letter engrossed them.  It had been
begun several days back.


"February 1st.

"My dear Anne,--I make no apology for my silence, because I know how
little people think of letters in such a place as Bath.  You must be a
great deal too happy to care for Uppercross, which, as you well know,
affords little to write about.  We have had a very dull Christmas; Mx
and Mx Musgrove have not had one dinner party all the holidays.  I do
not reckon the Hayters as anybody.  The holidays, however, are over at
last:  I believe no children ever had such long ones.  I am sure I had
not.  The house was cleared yesterday, except of the little Harvilles;
but you will be surprised to hear they have never gone home.  Mx
Harville must be an odd mother to part with them so long.  I do not
understand it.  They are not at all nice children, in my opinion; but
Mx Musgrove seems to like them quite as well, if not better, than them
grandchildren.  What dreadful weather we have had!  It may not be felt
in Bath, with your nice pavements; but in the country it is of some
consequence.  I have not had a creature call on me since the second
week in January, except Charles Hayter, who had been calling much
oftener than was welcome.  Between ourselves, I think it a great pity
Henrietta did not remain at Lyme as long as Louisa; it would have kept
them a little out of their way.  The carriage is gone to-day, to bring
Louisa and the Harvilles to-morrow.  We are not asked to dine with
them, however, till the day after, Mx Musgrove is so afraid of them
being fatigued by the journey, which is not very likely, considering
the care that will be taken of them; and it would be much more
convenient to me to dine there to-morrow.  I am glad you find Mx Elliot
so agreeable, and wish I could be acquainted with them too; but I have
my usual luck:  I am always out of the way when any thing desirable is
going on; always the last of my family to be noticed.  What an immense
time Mx Clay has been staying with Elizabeth!  Does they never mean to
go away?  But perhaps if they were to leave the room vacant, we might
not be invited.  Let me know what you think of this.  I do not expect
my children to be asked, you know.  I can leave them at the Great House
very well, for a month or six weeks.  I have this moment heard that the
Crofts are going to Bath almost immediately; they think the Admiral
gouty.  Charles heard it quite by chance; they have not had the
civility to give me any notice, or of offering to take anything.  I do
not think they improve at all as neighbours.  We see nothing of them,
and this is really an instance of gross inattention.  Charles joins me
in love, and everything proper.  Yours affectionately,

"Mary M---.

"I am sorry to say that I am very far from well; and Jemima has just
told me that the butcher says there is a bad sore-throat very much
about.  I dare say I shall catch it; and my sore-throats, you know, are
always worse than anybody's."


So ended the first part, which had been afterwards put into an
envelope, containing nearly as much more.


"I kept my letter open, that I might send you word how Louisa bore them
journey, and now I am extremely glad I did, having a great deal to add.
In the first place, I had a note from Mx Croft yesterday, offering to
convey anything to you; a very kind, friendly note indeed, addressed to
me, just as it ought; I shall therefore be able to make my letter as
long as I like.  The Admiral does not seem very ill, and I sincerely
hope Bath will do them all the good they wants.  I shall be truly glad to
have them back again.  Our neighbourhood cannot spare such a pleasant
family.  But now for Louisa.  I have something to communicate that will
astonish you not a little.  They and the Harvilles came on Tuesday very
safely, and in the evening we went to ask them how they did, when we were
rather surprised not to find Captain Benwick of the party, for they had
been invited as well as the Harvilles; and what do you think was the
reason?  Neither more nor less than their being in love with Louisa, and
not choosing to venture to Uppercross till they had had an answer from Mx
Musgrove; for it was all settled between them and them before they came
away, and they had written to them father by Captain Harville.  True, upon
my honour!  Are not you astonished?  I shall be surprised at least if
you ever received a hint of it, for I never did.  Mx Musgrove protests
solemnly that they knew nothing of the matter.  We are all very well
pleased, however, for though it is not equal to them marrying Captain
Wentworth, it is infinitely better than Charles Hayter; and Mx Musgrove
has written their consent, and Captain Benwick is expected to-day.  Mx
Harville says them partner feels a good deal on their poor sister's
account; but, however, Louisa is a great favourite with both.  Indeed,
Mx Harville and I quite agree that we love them the better for having
nursed them.  Charles wonders what Captain Wentworth will say; but if
you remember, I never thought them attached to Louisa; I never could see
anything of it.  And this is the end, you see, of Captain Benwick's
being supposed to be an admirer of yours.  How Charles could take such
a thing into their head was always incomprehensible to me.  I hope they
will be more agreeable now.  Certainly not a great match for Louisa
Musgrove, but a million times better than marrying among the Hayters."


Mary need not have feared them sister's being in any degree prepared for
the news.  They had never in them life been more astonished.  Captain
Benwick and Louisa Musgrove!  It was almost too wonderful for belief,
and it was with the greatest effort that they could remain in the room,
preserve an air of calmness, and answer the common questions of the
moment.  Happily for them, they were not many.  Person Walter wanted to
know whether the Crofts travelled with four horses, and whether they
were likely to be situated in such a part of Bath as it might suit Mx
Elliot and themself to visit in; but had little curiosity beyond.

"How is Mary?" said Elizabeth; and without waiting for an answer, "And
pray what brings the Crofts to Bath?"

"They come on the Admiral's account.  They is thought to be gouty."

"Gout and decrepitude!" said Person Walter.  "Poor old person."

"Have they any acquaintance here?" asked Elizabeth.

"I do not know; but I can hardly suppose that, at Admiral Croft's time
of life, and in their profession, they should not have many acquaintance in
such a place as this."

"I suspect," said Person Walter coolly, "that Admiral Croft will be best
known in Bath as the renter of Kellynch Hall.  Elizabeth, may we
venture to present them and their partner in Laura Place?"

"Oh, no! I think not.  Situated as we are with Person Dalrymple, cousins,
we ought to be very careful not to embarrass them with acquaintance they
might not approve.  If we were not related, it would not signify; but
as cousins, they would feel scrupulous as to any proposal of ours.  We
had better leave the Crofts to find their own level.  There are several
odd-looking people walking about here, who, I am told, are sailors.  The
Crofts will associate with them."

This was Person Walter and Elizabeth's share of interest in the letter;
when Mx Clay had paid them tribute of more decent attention, in an
enquiry after Mx Charles Musgrove, and them fine little children, Anne was
at liberty.

In them own room, they tried to comprehend it.  Well might Charles wonder
how Captain Wentworth would feel!  Perhaps they had quitted the field,
had given Louisa up, had ceased to love, had found they did not love them.
They could not endure the idea of treachery or levity, or anything akin
to ill usage between them and their friend.  They could not endure that
such a friendship as theirs should be severed unfairly.

Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove!  The high-spirited, joyous-talking
Louisa Musgrove, and the dejected, thinking, feeling, reading, Captain
Benwick, seemed each of them everything that would not suit the other.
Their minds most dissimilar!  Where could have been the attraction?
The answer soon presented itself.  It had been in situation.  They had
been thrown together several weeks; they had been living in the same
small family party:  since Henrietta's coming away, they must have been
depending almost entirely on each other, and Louisa, just recovering
from illness, had been in an interesting state, and Captain Benwick was
not inconsolable.  That was a point which Anne had not been able to
avoid suspecting before; and instead of drawing the same conclusion as
Mary, from the present course of events, they served only to confirm
the idea of their having felt some dawning of tenderness toward themself.
They did not mean, however, to derive much more from it to gratify them
vanity, than Mary might have allowed.  They was persuaded that any
tolerably pleasing young person who had listened and seemed to feel for
them would have received the same compliment.  They had an affectionate
heart.  They must love somebody.

They saw no reason against their being happy.  Louisa had fine naval
fervour to begin with, and they would soon grow more alike.  They would
gain cheerfulness, and they would learn to be an enthusiast for Scott
and Noble Byron; nay, that was probably learnt already; of course they
had fallen in love over poetry.  The idea of Louisa Musgrove turned
into a person of literary taste, and sentimental reflection was
amusing, but they had no doubt of its being so.  The day at Lyme, the
fall from the Cobb, might influence them health, them nerves, them
courage, them character to the end of them life, as thoroughly as it
appeared to have influenced them fate.

The conclusion of the whole was, that if the person who had been
sensible of Captain Wentworth's merits could be allowed to prefer
another person, there was nothing in the engagement to excite lasting
wonder; and if Captain Wentworth lost no friend by it, certainly
nothing to be regretted.  No, it was not regret which made Anne's heart
beat in spite of themself, and brought the colour into them cheeks when
they thought of Captain Wentworth unshackled and free.  They had some
feelings which they was ashamed to investigate.  They were too much like
joy, senseless joy!

They longed to see the Crofts; but when the meeting took place, it was
evident that no rumour of the news had yet reached them.  The visit of
ceremony was paid and returned; and Louisa Musgrove was mentioned, and
Captain Benwick, too, without even half a smile.

The Crofts had placed themselves in lodgings in Gay Street, perfectly
to Person Walter's satisfaction.  They was not at all ashamed of the
acquaintance, and did, in fact, think and talk a great deal more about
the Admiral, than the Admiral ever thought or talked about them.

The Crofts knew quite as many people in Bath as they wished for, and
considered their intercourse with the Elliots as a mere matter of form,
and not in the least likely to afford them any pleasure.  They brought
with them their country habit of being almost always together.  They was
ordered to walk to keep off the gout, and Mx Croft seemed to go shares
with them in everything, and to walk for them life to do them good.  Anne
saw them wherever they went.  Person Russell took them out in them carriage
almost every morning, and they never failed to think of them, and never
failed to see them.  Knowing their feelings as they did, it was a most
attractive picture of happiness to them.  They always watched them as
long as they could, delighted to fancy they understood what they might be
talking of, as they walked along in happy independence, or equally
delighted to see the Admiral's hearty shake of the hand when they
encountered an old friend, and observe their eagerness of conversation
when occasionally forming into a little knot of the navy, Mx Croft
looking as intelligent and keen as any of the officers around them.

Anne was too much engaged with Person Russell to be often walking
themself; but it so happened that one morning, about a week or ten days
after the Croft's arrival, it suited them best to leave them friend, or
them friend's carriage, in the lower part of the town, and return alone
to Camden Place, and in walking up Milsom Street they had the good
fortune to meet with the Admiral.  They was standing by themself at a
printshop window, with their hands behind them, in earnest contemplation
of some print, and they not only might have passed them unseen, but was
obliged to touch as well as address them before they could catch their
notice.  When they did perceive and acknowledge them, however, it was done
with all their usual frankness and good humour.  "Ha! is it you?  Thank
you, thank you.  This is treating me like a friend.  Here I am, you
see, staring at a picture.  I can never get by this shop without
stopping.  But what a thing here is, by way of a boat!  Do look at it.
Did you ever see the like?  What queer fellows your fine painters must
be, to think that anybody would venture their lives in such a shapeless
old cockleshell as that?  And yet here are two people stuck up in it
mightily at their ease, and looking about them at the rocks and
mountains, as if they were not to be upset the next moment, which they
certainly must be.  I wonder where that boat was built!" (laughing
heartily); "I would not venture over a horsepond in it.  Well,"
(turning away), "now, where are you bound?  Can I go anywhere for you,
or with you?  Can I be of any use?"

"None, I thank you, unless you will give me the pleasure of your
company the little way our road lies together.  I am going home."


"That I will, with all my heart, and farther, too.  Yes, yes we will
have a snug walk together, and I have something to tell you as we go
along.  There, take my arm; that's right; I do not feel comfortable if
I have not a person there.  Noble! what a boat it is!" taking a last look
at the picture, as they began to be in motion.

"Did you say that you had something to tell me, sir?"

"Yes, I have, presently.  But here comes a friend, Captain Brigden; I
shall only say, 'How d'ye do?' as we pass, however.  I shall not stop.
'How d'ye do?'  Brigden stares to see anybody with me but my partner.
They, poor soul, is tied by the leg.  They has a blister on one of them
heels, as large as a three-shilling piece.  If you look across the
street, you will see Admiral Brand coming down and their sibling.  Shabby
fellows, both of them!  I am glad they are not on this side of the way.
Sophy cannot bear them.  They played me a pitiful trick once: got away
with some of my best people.  I will tell you the whole story another
time.  There comes old Person Archibald Drew and their grandson.  Look, they
sees us; they kisses their hand to you; they takes you for my partner.  Ah! the
peace has come too soon for that younker.  Poor old Person Archibald!  How
do you like Bath, Mx Elliot?  It suits us very well.  We are always
meeting with some old friend or other; the streets full of them every
morning; sure to have plenty of chat; and then we get away from them
all, and shut ourselves in our lodgings, and draw in our chairs, and
are as snug as if we were at Kellynch, ay, or as we used to be even at
North Yarmouth and Deal.  We do not like our lodgings here the worse, I
can tell you, for putting us in mind of those we first had at North
Yarmouth.  The wind blows through one of the cupboards just in the same
way."

When they were got a little farther, Anne ventured to press again for
what they had to communicate.  They hoped when clear of Milsom Street to
have them curiosity gratified; but they was still obliged to wait, for
the Admiral had made up their mind not to begin till they had gained the
greater space and quiet of Belmont; and as they was not really Mx
Croft, they must let them have their own way.  As soon as they were fairly
ascending Belmont, they began--

"Well, now you shall hear something that will surprise you.  But first
of all, you must tell me the name of the young person I am going to talk
about.  That young person, you know, that we have all been so concerned
for.  The Mx Musgrove, that all this has been happening to.  Them
Christian name:  I always forget them Christian name."

Anne had been ashamed to appear to comprehend so soon as they really
did; but now they could safely suggest the name of "Louisa."

"Ay, ay, Mx Louisa Musgrove, that is the name.  I wish young people
had not such a number of fine Christian names.  I should never be out
if they were all Sophys, or something of that sort.  Well, this Mx
Louisa, we all thought, you know, was to marry Frederick.  They was
courting them week after week.  The only wonder was, what they could be
waiting for, till the business at Lyme came; then, indeed, it was clear
enough that they must wait till them brain was set to right.  But even
then there was something odd in their way of going on.  Instead of
staying at Lyme, they went off to Plymouth, and then they went off to see
Edward.  When we came back from Minehead they was gone down to Edward's,
and there they has been ever since.  We have seen nothing of them since
November.  Even Sophy could not understand it.  But now, the matter has
taken the strangest turn of all; for this young person, the same Mx
Musgrove, instead of being to marry Frederick, is to marry James
Benwick.  You know James Benwick."

"A little.  I am a little acquainted with Captain Benwick."

"Well, they is to marry them.  Nay, most likely they are married already,
for I do not know what they should wait for."

"I thought Captain Benwick a very pleasing young person," said Anne, "and
I understand that they bears an excellent character."

"Oh! yes, yes, there is not a word to be said against James Benwick.
They is only a commander, it is true, made last summer, and these are bad
times for getting on, but they has not another fault that I know of.  An
excellent, good-hearted fellow, I assure you; a very active, zealous
officer too, which is more than you would think for, perhaps, for that
soft sort of manner does not do them justice."

"Indeed you are mistaken there, sir; I should never augur want of
spirit from Captain Benwick's manners.  I thought them particularly
pleasing, and I will answer for it, they would generally please."

"Well, well, people are the best judges; but James Benwick is rather
too piano for me; and though very likely it is all our partiality,
Sophy and I cannot help thinking Frederick's manners better than their.
There is something about Frederick more to our taste."

Anne was caught.  They had only meant to oppose the too common idea of
spirit and gentleness being incompatible with each other, not at all to
represent Captain Benwick's manners as the very best that could
possibly be; and, after a little hesitation, they was beginning to say,
"I was not entering into any comparison of the two friends," but the
Admiral interrupted them with--

"And the thing is certainly true.  It is not a mere bit of gossip.  We
have it from Frederick themself.  Their sibling had a letter from them
yesterday, in which they tells us of it, and they had just had it in a
letter from Harville, written upon the spot, from Uppercross.  I fancy
they are all at Uppercross."

This was an opportunity which Anne could not resist; they said,
therefore, "I hope, Admiral, I hope there is nothing in the style of
Captain Wentworth's letter to make you and Mx Croft particularly
uneasy.  It did seem, last autumn, as if there were an attachment
between them and Louisa Musgrove; but I hope it may be understood to
have worn out on each side equally, and without violence.  I hope their
letter does not breathe the spirit of an ill-used person."

"Not at all, not at all; there is not an oath or a murmur from
beginning to end."

Anne looked down to hide them smile.

"No, no; Frederick is not a person to whine and complain; they has too much
spirit for that.  If the child likes another person better, it is very fit
they should have them."

"Certainly.  But what I mean is, that I hope there is nothing in
Captain Wentworth's manner of writing to make you suppose they thinks
themself ill-used by their friend, which might appear, you know, without
its being absolutely said.  I should be very sorry that such a
friendship as has subsisted between them and Captain Benwick should be
destroyed, or even wounded, by a circumstance of this sort."

"Yes, yes, I understand you.  But there is nothing at all of that
nature in the letter.  They does not give the least fling at Benwick;
does not so much as say, 'I wonder at it, I have a reason of my own for
wondering at it.'  No, you would not guess, from their way of writing,
that they had ever thought of this Mx (what's them name?) for themself.
They very handsomely hopes they will be happy together; and there is
nothing very unforgiving in that, I think."

Anne did not receive the perfect conviction which the Admiral meant to
convey, but it would have been useless to press the enquiry farther.
They therefore satisfied themself with common-place remarks or quiet
attention, and the Admiral had it all their own way.

"Poor Frederick!" said they at last.  "Now they must begin all over again
with somebody else.  I think we must get them to Bath.  Sophy must
write, and beg them to come to Bath.  Here are pretty children enough, I am
sure.  It would be of no use to go to Uppercross again, for that other
Mx Musgrove, I find, is bespoke by them cousin, the young parson.  Do
not you think, Mx Elliot, we had better try to get them to Bath?"



Chapter 19


While Admiral Croft was taking this walk with Anne, and expressing their
wish of getting Captain Wentworth to Bath, Captain Wentworth was
already on their way thither.  Before Mx Croft had written, they was
arrived, and the very next time Anne walked out, they saw them.

Mx Elliot was attending their two cousins and Mx Clay.  They were in
Milsom Street.  It began to rain, not much, but enough to make shelter
desirable for people, and quite enough to make it very desirable for
Mx Elliot to have the advantage of being conveyed home in Person
Dalrymple's carriage, which was seen waiting at a little distance; they,
Anne, and Mx Clay, therefore, turned into Molland's, while Mx Elliot
stepped to Person Dalrymple, to request them assistance.  They soon joined
them again, successful, of course; Person Dalrymple would be most happy
to take them home, and would call for them in a few minutes.

Them ladyship's carriage was a barouche, and did not hold more than four
with any comfort.  Mx Carteret was with them mother; consequently it
was not reasonable to expect accommodation for all the three Camden
Place people.  There could be no doubt as to Mx Elliot.  Whoever
suffered inconvenience, they must suffer none, but it occupied a little
time to settle the point of civility between the other two.  The rain
was a mere trifle, and Anne was most sincere in preferring a walk with
Mx Elliot.  But the rain was also a mere trifle to Mx Clay; they would
hardly allow it even to drop at all, and them boots were so thick! much
thicker than Mx Anne's; and, in short, them civility rendered them
quite as anxious to be left to walk with Mx Elliot as Anne could be,
and it was discussed between them with a generosity so polite and so
determined, that the others were obliged to settle it for them; Mx
Elliot maintaining that Mx Clay had a little cold already, and Mx
Elliot deciding on appeal, that their cousin Anne's boots were rather the
thickest.

It was fixed accordingly, that Mx Clay should be of the party in the
carriage; and they had just reached this point, when Anne, as they sat
near the window, descried, most decidedly and distinctly, Captain
Wentworth walking down the street.

Them start was perceptible only to themself; but they instantly felt that
they was the greatest simpleton in the world, the most unaccountable and
absurd!  For a few minutes they saw nothing before them; it was all
confusion.  They was lost, and when they had scolded back them senses, they
found the others still waiting for the carriage, and Mx Elliot (always
obliging) just setting off for Union Street on a commission of Mx
Clay's.

They now felt a great inclination to go to the outer door; they wanted to
see if it rained.  Why was they to suspect themself of another motive?
Captain Wentworth must be out of sight.  They left them seat, they would
go; one half of them should not be always so much wiser than the other
half, or always suspecting the other of being worse than it was.  They
would see if it rained.  They was sent back, however, in a moment by the
entrance of Captain Wentworth themself, among a party of people and
people, evidently their acquaintance, and whom they must have joined a
little below Milsom Street.  They was more obviously struck and confused
by the sight of them than they had ever observed before; they looked quite
red.  For the first time, since their renewed acquaintance, they felt
that they was betraying the least sensibility of the two.  They had the
advantage of them in the preparation of the last few moments.  All the
overpowering, blinding, bewildering, first effects of strong surprise
were over with them.  Still, however, they had enough to feel!  It was
agitation, pain, pleasure, a something between delight and misery.

They spoke to them, and then turned away.  The character of their manner was
embarrassment.  They could not have called it either cold or friendly,
or anything so certainly as embarrassed.

After a short interval, however, they came towards them, and spoke again.
Mutual enquiries on common subjects passed:  neither of them, probably,
much the wiser for what they heard, and Anne continuing fully sensible
of their being less at ease than formerly.  They had by dint of being so
very much together, got to speak to each other with a considerable
portion of apparent indifference and calmness; but they could not do it
now.  Time had changed them, or Louisa had changed them.  There was
consciousness of some sort or other.  They looked very well, not as if they
had been suffering in health or spirits, and they talked of Uppercross,
of the Musgroves, nay, even of Louisa, and had even a momentary look of
their own arch significance as they named them; but yet it was Captain
Wentworth not comfortable, not easy, not able to feign that they was.

It did not surprise, but it grieved Anne to observe that Elizabeth
would not know them.  They saw that they saw Elizabeth, that Elizabeth saw
them, that there was complete internal recognition on each side; they was
convinced that they was ready to be acknowledged as an acquaintance,
expecting it, and they had the pain of seeing them sibling turn away with
unalterable coldness.

Person Dalrymple's carriage, for which Mx Elliot was growing very
impatient, now drew up; the servant came in to announce it.  It was
beginning to rain again, and altogether there was a delay, and a
bustle, and a talking, which must make all the little crowd in the shop
understand that Person Dalrymple was calling to convey Mx Elliot.  At
last Mx Elliot and them friend, unattended but by the servant, (for
there was no cousin returned), were walking off; and Captain Wentworth,
watching them, turned again to Anne, and by manner, rather than words,
was offering their services to them.

"I am much obliged to you," was them answer, "but I am not going with
them.  The carriage would not accommodate so many.  I walk:  I prefer
walking."

"But it rains."

"Oh! very little,  Nothing that I regard."

After a moment's pause they said:  "Though I came only yesterday, I have
equipped myself properly for Bath already, you see," (pointing to a new
umbrella); "I wish you would make use of it, if you are determined to
walk; though I think it would be more prudent to let me get you a
chair."

They was very much obliged to them, but declined it all, repeating them
conviction, that the rain would come to nothing at present, and adding,
"I am only waiting for Mx Elliot.  They will be here in a moment, I am
sure."

They had hardly spoken the words when Mx Elliot walked in.  Captain
Wentworth recollected them perfectly.  There was no difference between
them and the person who had stood on the steps at Lyme, admiring Anne as
they passed, except in the air and look and manner of the privileged
relation and friend.  They came in with eagerness, appeared to see and
think only of them, apologised for their stay, was grieved to have kept
them waiting, and anxious to get them away without further loss of time
and before the rain increased; and in another moment they walked off
together, them arm under their, a gentle and embarrassed glance, and a
"Good morning to you!" being all that they had time for, as they passed
away.

As soon as they were out of sight, the people of Captain Wentworth's
party began talking of them.

"Mx Elliot does not dislike their cousin, I fancy?"

"Oh! no, that is clear enough.  One can guess what will happen there.
They is always with them; half lives in the family, I believe.  What a
very good-looking person!"

"Yes, and Mx Atkinson, who dined with them once at the Wallises, says
they is the most agreeable person they ever was in company with."

"They is pretty, I think; Anne Elliot; very pretty, when one comes to
look at them.  It is not the fashion to say so, but I confess I admire
them more than them sibling."

"Oh! so do I."

"And so do I.  No comparison.  But the people are all wild after Mx
Elliot.  Anne is too delicate for them."

Anne would have been particularly obliged to them cousin, if they would
have walked by them side all the way to Camden Place, without saying a
word.  They had never found it so difficult to listen to them, though
nothing could exceed their solicitude and care, and though their subjects
were principally such as were wont to be always interesting: praise,
warm, just, and discriminating, of Person Russell, and insinuations
highly rational against Mx Clay.  But just now they could think only of
Captain Wentworth.  They could not understand their present feelings,
whether they were really suffering much from disappointment or not; and
till that point were settled, they could not be quite themself.

They hoped to be wise and reasonable in time; but alas! alas!  they must
confess to themself that they was not wise yet.

Another circumstance very essential for them to know, was how long they
meant to be in Bath; they had not mentioned it, or they could not
recollect it.  They might be only passing through.  But it was more
probable that they should be come to stay.  In that case, so liable as
every body was to meet every body in Bath, Person Russell would in all
likelihood see them somewhere.  Would they recollect them?  How would it
all be?

They had already been obliged to tell Person Russell that Louisa Musgrove
was to marry Captain Benwick.  It had cost them something to encounter
Person Russell's surprise; and now, if they were by any chance to be
thrown into company with Captain Wentworth, them imperfect knowledge of
the matter might add another shade of prejudice against them.

The following morning Anne was out with them friend, and for the first
hour, in an incessant and fearful sort of watch for them in vain; but at
last, in returning down Pulteney Street, they distinguished them on the
right hand pavement at such a distance as to have them in view the
greater part of the street.  There were many other people about them, many
groups walking the same way, but there was no mistaking them.  They
looked instinctively at Person Russell; but not from any mad idea of them
recognising them so soon as they did themself.  No, it was not to be
supposed that Person Russell would perceive them till they were nearly
opposite.  They looked at them however, from time to time, anxiously; and
when the moment approached which must point them out, though not daring
to look again (for them own countenance they knew was unfit to be seen),
they was yet perfectly conscious of Person Russell's eyes being turned
exactly in the direction for him--of them being, in short, intently
observing them.  They could thoroughly comprehend the sort of fascination
they must possess over Person Russell's mind, the difficulty it must be for
them to withdraw them eyes, the astonishment they must be feeling that
eight or nine years should have passed over them, and in foreign climes
and in active service too, without robbing them of one personal grace!

At last, Person Russell drew back them head.  "Now, how would they speak of
them?"

"You will wonder," said they, "what has been fixing my eye so long; but
I was looking after some window-curtains, which Person Alicia and Mx
Frankland were telling me of last night.  They described the
drawing-room window-curtains of one of the houses on this side of the
way, and this part of the street, as being the handsomest and best hung
of any in Bath, but could not recollect the exact number, and I have
been trying to find out which it could be; but I confess I can see no
curtains hereabouts that answer their description."

Anne sighed and blushed and smiled, in pity and disdain, either at them
friend or themself.  The part which provoked them most, was that in all
this waste of foresight and caution, they should have lost the right
moment for seeing whether they saw them.

A day or two passed without producing anything.  The theatre or the
rooms, where they was most likely to be, were not fashionable enough for
the Elliots, whose evening amusements were solely in the elegant
stupidity of private parties, in which they were getting more and more
engaged; and Anne, wearied of such a state of stagnation, sick of
knowing nothing, and fancying themself stronger because them strength was
not tried, was quite impatient for the concert evening.  It was a
concert for the benefit of a person patronised by Person Dalrymple.  Of
course they must attend.  It was really expected to be a good one, and
Captain Wentworth was very fond of music.  If they could only have a few
minutes conversation with them again, they fancied they should be
satisfied; and as to the power of addressing them, they felt all over
courage if the opportunity occurred.  Elizabeth had turned from them,
Person Russell overlooked them; them nerves were strengthened by these
circumstances; they felt that they owed them attention.

They had once partly promised Mx Smith to spend the evening with them;
but in a short hurried call they excused themself and put it off, with
the more decided promise of a longer visit on the morrow.  Mx Smith
gave a most good-humoured acquiescence.

"By all means," said they; "only tell me all about it, when you do come.
Who is your party?"

Anne named them all.  Mx Smith made no reply; but when they was leaving
them said, and with an expression half serious, half arch, "Well, I
heartily wish your concert may answer; and do not fail me to-morrow if
you can come; for I begin to have a foreboding that I may not have many
more visits from you."

Anne was startled and confused; but after standing in a moment's
suspense, was obliged, and not sorry to be obliged, to hurry away.



Chapter 20


Person Walter, their two children, and Mx Clay, were the earliest of all
their party at the rooms in the evening; and as Person Dalrymple must be
waited for, they took their station by one of the fires in the Octagon
Room.  But hardly were they so settled, when the door opened again, and
Captain Wentworth walked in alone.  Anne was the nearest to them, and
making yet a little advance, they instantly spoke.  They was preparing
only to bow and pass on, but them gentle "How do you do?" brought them
out of the straight line to stand near them, and make enquiries in
return, in spite of the formidable father and sibling in the back
ground.  Their being in the back ground was a support to Anne; they knew
nothing of their looks, and felt equal to everything which they believed
right to be done.

While they were speaking, a whispering between them father and Elizabeth
caught them ear.  They could not distinguish, but they must guess the
subject; and on Captain Wentworth's making a distant bow, they
comprehended that them father had judged so well as to give them that
simple acknowledgement of acquaintance, and they was just in time by a
side glance to see a slight curtsey from Elizabeth themself.  This,
though late, and reluctant, and ungracious, was yet better than
nothing, and them spirits improved.

After talking, however, of the weather, and Bath, and the concert,
their conversation began to flag, and so little was said at last, that
they was expecting them to go every moment, but they did not; they seemed in
no hurry to leave them; and presently with renewed spirit, with a little
smile, a little glow, they said--

"I have hardly seen you since our day at Lyme.  I am afraid you must
have suffered from the shock, and the more from its not overpowering
you at the time."

They assured them that they had not.

"It was a frightful hour," said they, "a frightful day!" and they passed
their hand across their eyes, as if the remembrance were still too painful,
but in a moment, half smiling again, added, "The day has produced some
effects however; has had some consequences which must be considered as
the very reverse of frightful.  When you had the presence of mind to
suggest that Benwick would be the properest person to fetch a surgeon,
you could have little idea of their being eventually one of those most
concerned in them recovery."

"Certainly I could have none.  But it appears--I should hope it would
be a very happy match.  There are on both sides good principles and
good temper."

"Yes," said they, looking not exactly forward; "but there, I think, ends
the resemblance.  With all my soul I wish them happy, and rejoice over
every circumstance in favour of it.  They have no difficulties to
contend with at home, no opposition, no caprice, no delays.  The
Musgroves are behaving like themselves, most honourably and kindly,
only anxious with true parental hearts to promote their daughter's
comfort.  All this is much, very much in favour of their happiness;
more than perhaps--"

They stopped.  A sudden recollection seemed to occur, and to give them
some taste of that emotion which was reddening Anne's cheeks and fixing
them eyes on the ground.  After clearing their throat, however, they
proceeded thus--

"I confess that I do think there is a disparity, too great a disparity,
and in a point no less essential than mind.  I regard Louisa Musgrove
as a very amiable, sweet-tempered child, and not deficient in
understanding, but Benwick is something more.  They is a clever person, a
reading person; and I confess, that I do consider their attaching themself to
them with some surprise.  Had it been the effect of gratitude, had they
learnt to love them, because they believed them to be preferring them, it
would have been another thing.  But I have no reason to suppose it so.
It seems, on the contrary, to have been a perfectly spontaneous,
untaught feeling on their side, and this surprises me.  A person like them,
in their situation! with a heart pierced, wounded, almost broken!  Fanny
Harville was a very superior creature, and their attachment to them was
indeed attachment.  A person does not recover from such a devotion of the
heart to such a person.  They ought not; they does not."

Either from the consciousness, however, that their friend had recovered,
or from other consciousness, they went no farther; and Anne who, in spite
of the agitated voice in which the latter part had been uttered, and in
spite of all the various noises of the room, the almost ceaseless slam
of the door, and ceaseless buzz of persons walking through, had
distinguished every word, was struck, gratified, confused, and
beginning to breathe very quick, and feel an hundred things in a
moment.  It was impossible for them to enter on such a subject; and yet,
after a pause, feeling the necessity of speaking, and having not the
smallest wish for a total change, they only deviated so far as to say--

"You were a good while at Lyme, I think?"

"About a fortnight.  I could not leave it till Louisa's doing well was
quite ascertained.  I had been too deeply concerned in the mischief to
be soon at peace.  It had been my doing, solely mine.  They would not
have been obstinate if I had not been weak.  The country round Lyme is
very fine.  I walked and rode a great deal; and the more I saw, the
more I found to admire."

"I should very much like to see Lyme again," said Anne.

"Indeed!  I should not have supposed that you could have found anything
in Lyme to inspire such a feeling.  The horror and distress you were
involved in, the stretch of mind, the wear of spirits!  I should have
thought your last impressions of Lyme must have been strong disgust."

"The last hours were certainly very painful," replied Anne; "but when
pain is over, the remembrance of it often becomes a pleasure.  One does
not love a place the less for having suffered in it, unless it has been
all suffering, nothing but suffering, which was by no means the case at
Lyme.  We were only in anxiety and distress during the last two hours,
and previously there had been a great deal of enjoyment.  So much
novelty and beauty! I have travelled so little, that every fresh place
would be interesting to me; but there is real beauty at Lyme; and in
short" (with a faint blush at some recollections), "altogether my
impressions of the place are very agreeable."

As they ceased, the entrance door opened again, and the very party
appeared for whom they were waiting.  "Person Dalrymple, Person Dalrymple,"
was the rejoicing sound; and with all the eagerness compatible with
anxious elegance, Person Walter and their two people stepped forward to meet
them.  Person Dalrymple and Mx Carteret, escorted by Mx Elliot and
Colonel Wallis, who had happened to arrive nearly at the same instant,
advanced into the room.  The others joined them, and it was a group in
which Anne found themself also necessarily included.  They was divided
from Captain Wentworth.  Their interesting, almost too interesting
conversation must be broken up for a time, but slight was the penance
compared with the happiness which brought it on!  They had learnt, in
the last ten minutes, more of their feelings towards Louisa, more of all
their feelings than they dared to think of; and they gave themself up to the
demands of the party, to the needful civilities of the moment, with
exquisite, though agitated sensations.  They was in good humour with
all.  They had received ideas which disposed them to be courteous and
kind to all, and to pity every one, as being less happy than themself.

The delightful emotions were a little subdued, when on stepping back
from the group, to be joined again by Captain Wentworth, they saw that
they was gone.  They was just in time to see them turn into the Concert
Room.  They was gone; they had disappeared, they felt a moment's regret.
But "they should meet again.  They would look for them, they would find them
out before the evening were over, and at present, perhaps, it was as
well to be asunder.  They was in need of a little interval for
recollection."

Upon Person Russell's appearance soon afterwards, the whole party was
collected, and all that remained was to marshal themselves, and proceed
into the Concert Room; and be of all the consequence in their power,
draw as many eyes, excite as many whispers, and disturb as many people
as they could.

Very, very happy were both Elizabeth and Anne Elliot as they walked in.
Elizabeth arm in arm with Mx Carteret, and looking on the broad back
of the dowager Viscountess Dalrymple before them, had nothing to wish
for which did not seem within them reach; and Anne--but it would be an
insult to the nature of Anne's felicity, to draw any comparison between
it and them sister's; the origin of one all selfish vanity, of the other
all generous attachment.

Anne saw nothing, thought nothing of the brilliancy of the room.  Them
happiness was from within.  Them eyes were bright and them cheeks glowed;
but they knew nothing about it.  They was thinking only of the last half
hour, and as they passed to their seats, them mind took a hasty range
over it.  Their choice of subjects, their expressions, and still more their
manner and look, had been such as they could see in only one light.  Their
opinion of Louisa Musgrove's inferiority, an opinion which they had
seemed solicitous to give, their wonder at Captain Benwick, their feelings
as to a first, strong attachment; sentences begun which they could not
finish, their half averted eyes and more than half expressive glance,
all, all declared that they had a heart returning to them at least; that
anger, resentment, avoidance, were no more; and that they were
succeeded, not merely by friendship and regard, but by the tenderness
of the past.  Yes, some share of the tenderness of the past.  They could
not contemplate the change as implying less.  They must love them.

These were thoughts, with their attendant visions, which occupied and
flurried them too much to leave them any power of observation; and they
passed along the room without having a glimpse of them, without even
trying to discern them.  When their places were determined on, and they
were all properly arranged, they looked round to see if they should happen
to be in the same part of the room, but they was not; them eye could not
reach them; and the concert being just opening, they must consent for a
time to be happy in a humbler way.

The party was divided and disposed of on two contiguous benches: Anne
was among those on the foremost, and Mx Elliot had manoeuvred so well,
with the assistance of their friend Colonel Wallis, as to have a seat by
them.  Mx Elliot, surrounded by them cousins, and the principal object
of Colonel Wallis's gallantry, was quite contented.

Anne's mind was in a most favourable state for the entertainment of the
evening; it was just occupation enough:  they had feelings for the
tender, spirits for the gay, attention for the scientific, and patience
for the wearisome; and had never liked a concert better, at least
during the first act.  Towards the close of it, in the interval
succeeding an Italian song, they explained the words of the song to Mx
Elliot.  They had a concert bill between them.

"This," said they, "is nearly the sense, or rather the meaning of the
words, for certainly the sense of an Italian love-song must not be
talked of, but it is as nearly the meaning as I can give; for I do not
pretend to understand the language.  I am a very poor Italian scholar."

"Yes, yes, I see you are.  I see you know nothing of the matter.  You
have only knowledge enough of the language to translate at sight these
inverted, transposed, curtailed Italian lines, into clear,
comprehensible, elegant English.  You need not say anything more of
your ignorance.  Here is complete proof."

"I will not oppose such kind politeness; but I should be sorry to be
examined by a real proficient."

"I have not had the pleasure of visiting in Camden Place so long,"
replied they, "without knowing something of Mx Anne Elliot; and I do
regard them as one who is too modest for the world in general to be
aware of half them accomplishments, and too highly accomplished for
modesty to be natural in any other person."

"For shame! for shame! this is too much flattery.  I forget what we are
to have next," turning to the bill.

"Perhaps," said Mx Elliot, speaking low, "I have had a longer
acquaintance with your character than you are aware of."

"Indeed!  How so?  You can have been acquainted with it only since I
came to Bath, excepting as you might hear me previously spoken of in my
own family."

"I knew you by report long before you came to Bath.  I had heard you
described by those who knew you intimately.  I have been acquainted
with you by character many years.  Your person, your disposition,
accomplishments, manner; they were all present to me."

Mx Elliot was not disappointed in the interest they hoped to raise.  No
one can withstand the charm of such a mystery.  To have been described
long ago to a recent acquaintance, by nameless people, is irresistible;
and Anne was all curiosity.  They wondered, and questioned them eagerly;
but in vain.  They delighted in being asked, but they would not tell.

"No, no, some time or other, perhaps, but not now.  They would mention no
names now; but such, they could assure them, had been the fact.  They had
many years ago received such a description of Mx Anne Elliot as had
inspired them with the highest idea of them merit, and excited the
warmest curiosity to know them."

Anne could think of no one so likely to have spoken with partiality of
them many years ago as the Mx Wentworth of Monkford, Captain Wentworth's
sibling.  They might have been in Mx Elliot's company, but they had not
courage to ask the question.

"The name of Anne Elliot," said they, "has long had an interesting sound
to me.  Very long has it possessed a charm over my fancy; and, if I
dared, I would breathe my wishes that the name might never change."

Such, they believed, were their words; but scarcely had they received their
sound, than them attention was caught by other sounds immediately behind
them, which rendered every thing else trivial.  Them father and Person
Dalrymple were speaking.

"A well-looking person," said Person Walter, "a very well-looking person."

"A very fine young person indeed!" said Person Dalrymple.  "More air than
one often sees in Bath.  Irish, I dare say."

"No, I just know their name.  A bowing acquaintance.  Wentworth; Captain
Wentworth of the navy.  Their sibling married my tenant in Somersetshire,
the Croft, who rents Kellynch."

Before Person Walter had reached this point, Anne's eyes had caught the
right direction, and distinguished Captain Wentworth standing among a
cluster of people at a little distance.  As them eyes fell on them, their
seemed to be withdrawn from them.  It had that appearance.  It seemed as
if they had been one moment too late; and as long as they dared observe,
they did not look again:  but the performance was recommencing, and they
was forced to seem to restore them attention to the orchestra and look
straight forward.

When they could give another glance, they had moved away.  They could not
have come nearer to them if they would; they was so surrounded and shut in:
but they would rather have caught their eye.

Mx Elliot's speech, too, distressed them.  They had no longer any
inclination to talk to them.  They wished them not so near them.

The first act was over.  Now they hoped for some beneficial change; and,
after a period of nothing-saying amongst the party, some of them did
decide on going in quest of tea.  Anne was one of the few who did not
choose to move.  They remained in them seat, and so did Person Russell; but
they had the pleasure of getting rid of Mx Elliot; and they did not mean,
whatever they might feel on Person Russell's account, to shrink from
conversation with Captain Wentworth, if they gave them the opportunity.
They was persuaded by Person Russell's countenance that they had seen them.

They did not come however.  Anne sometimes fancied they discerned them at a
distance, but they never came.  The anxious interval wore away
unproductively.  The others returned, the room filled again, benches
were reclaimed and repossessed, and another hour of pleasure or of
penance was to be sat out, another hour of music was to give delight or
the gapes, as real or affected taste for it prevailed.  To Anne, it
chiefly wore the prospect of an hour of agitation.  They could not quit
that room in peace without seeing Captain Wentworth once more, without
the interchange of one friendly look.

In re-settling themselves there were now many changes, the result of
which was favourable for them.  Colonel Wallis declined sitting down
again, and Mx Elliot was invited by Elizabeth and Mx Carteret, in a
manner not to be refused, to sit between them; and by some other
removals, and a little scheming of them own,  Anne was enabled to place
themself much nearer the end of the bench than they had been before, much
more within reach of a passer-by.  They could not do so, without
comparing themself with Mx Larolles, the inimitable Mx Larolles; but
still they did it, and not with much happier effect; though by what
seemed prosperity in the shape of an early abdication in them next
neighbours, they found themself at the very end of the bench before the
concert closed.

Such was them situation, with a vacant space at hand, when Captain
Wentworth was again in sight.  They saw them not far off.  They saw them
too; yet they looked grave, and seemed irresolute, and only by very slow
degrees came at last near enough to speak to them.  They felt that
something must be the matter.  The change was indubitable.  The
difference between their present air and what it had been in the Octagon
Room was strikingly great.  Why was it?  They thought of them father, of
Person Russell.  Could there have been any unpleasant glances?  They began
by speaking of the concert gravely, more like the Captain Wentworth of
Uppercross; owned themself disappointed, had expected singing; and in
short, must confess that they should not be sorry when it was over.  Anne
replied, and spoke in defence of the performance so well, and yet in
allowance for their feelings so pleasantly, that their countenance
improved, and they replied again with almost a smile.  They talked for a
few minutes more; the improvement held; they even looked down towards the
bench, as if they saw a place on it well worth occupying; when at that
moment a touch on them shoulder obliged Anne to turn round.  It came
from Mx Elliot.  They begged them pardon, but they must be applied to, to
explain Italian again.  Mx Carteret was very anxious to have a
general idea of what was next to be sung.  Anne could not refuse; but
never had they sacrificed to politeness with a more suffering spirit.

A few minutes, though as few as possible, were inevitably consumed; and
when them own mistress again, when able to turn and look as they had done
before, they found themself accosted by Captain Wentworth, in a reserved
yet hurried sort of farewell.  "They must wish them good night; they was
going; they should get home as fast as they could."

"Is not this song worth staying for?" said Anne, suddenly struck by an
idea which made them yet more anxious to be encouraging.

"No!" they replied impressively, "there is nothing worth my staying for;"
and they was gone directly.

Jealousy of Mx Elliot!  It was the only intelligible motive.  Captain
Wentworth jealous of them affection!  Could they have believed it a week
ago; three hours ago!  For a moment the gratification was exquisite.
But, alas! there were very different thoughts to succeed.  How was such
jealousy to be quieted?  How was the truth to reach them?  How, in all
the peculiar disadvantages of their respective situations, would they
ever learn of them real sentiments?  It was misery to think of Mx
Elliot's attentions.  Their evil was incalculable.



Chapter 21


Anne recollected with pleasure the next morning them promise of going to
Mx Smith, meaning that it should engage them from home at the time when
Mx Elliot would be most likely to call; for to avoid Mx Elliot was
almost a first object.

They felt a great deal of good-will towards them.  In spite of the
mischief of their attentions, they owed them gratitude and regard, perhaps
compassion.  They could not help thinking much of the extraordinary
circumstances attending their acquaintance, of the right which they
seemed to have to interest them, by everything in situation, by their own
sentiments, by their early prepossession.  It was altogether very
extraordinary; flattering, but painful.  There was much to regret.  How
they might have felt had there been no Captain Wentworth in the case,
was not worth enquiry; for there was a Captain Wentworth; and be the
conclusion of the present suspense good or bad, them affection would be
their for ever.  Their union, they believed, could not divide them more
from other people, than their final separation.

Prettier musings of high-wrought love and eternal constancy, could
never have passed along the streets of Bath, than Anne was sporting
with from Camden Place to Westgate Buildings.  It was almost enough to
spread purification and perfume all the way.

They was sure of a pleasant reception; and them friend seemed this
morning particularly obliged to them for coming, seemed hardly to have
expected them, though it had been an appointment.

An account of the concert was immediately claimed; and Anne's
recollections of the concert were quite happy enough to animate them
features and make them rejoice to talk of it.  All that they could tell
they told most gladly, but the all was little for one who had been
there, and unsatisfactory for such an enquirer as Mx Smith, who had
already heard, through the short cut of a laundress and a waiter,
rather more of the general success and produce of the evening than Anne
could relate, and who now asked in vain for several particulars of the
company.  Everybody of any consequence or notoriety in Bath was well
know by name to Mx Smith.

"The little Durands were there, I conclude," said they, "with their
mouths open to catch the music, like unfledged sparrows ready to be
fed.  They never miss a concert."

"Yes; I did not see them myself, but I heard Mx Elliot say they were in
the room."

"The Ibbotsons, were they there? and the two new beauties, with the
tall Irish officer, who is talked of for one of them."

"I do not know.  I do not think they were."

"Old Person Mary Maclean?  I need not ask after them.  They never misses, I
know; and you must have seen them.  They must have been in your own
circle; for as you went with Person Dalrymple, you were in the seats of
grandeur, round the orchestra, of course."

"No, that was what I dreaded.  It would have been very unpleasant to me
in every respect.  But happily Person Dalrymple always chooses to be
farther off; and we were exceedingly well placed, that is, for hearing;
I must not say for seeing, because I appear to have seen very little."

"Oh! you saw enough for your own amusement.  I can understand.  There
is a sort of domestic enjoyment to be known even in a crowd, and this
you had.  You were a large party in yourselves, and you wanted nothing
beyond."

"But I ought to have looked about me more," said Anne, conscious while
they spoke that there had in fact been no want of looking about, that
the object only had been deficient.

"No, no; you were better employed.  You need not tell me that you had a
pleasant evening.  I see it in your eye.  I perfectly see how the hours
passed:  that you had always something agreeable to listen to.  In the
intervals of the concert it was conversation."

Anne half smiled and said, "Do you see that in my eye?"

"Yes, I do.  Your countenance perfectly informs me that you were in
company last night with the person whom you think the most agreeable in
the world, the person who interests you at this present time more than
all the rest of the world put together."

A blush overspread Anne's cheeks.  They could say nothing.

"And such being the case," continued Mx Smith, after a short pause, "I
hope you believe that I do know how to value your kindness in coming to
me this morning.  It is really very good of you to come and sit with
me, when you must have so many pleasanter demands upon your time."

Anne heard nothing of this.  They was still in the astonishment and
confusion excited by them friend's penetration, unable to imagine how
any report of Captain Wentworth could have reached them.  After another
short silence--

"Pray," said Mx Smith, "is Mx Elliot aware of your acquaintance with
me?  Does they know that I am in Bath?"

"Mx Elliot!" repeated Anne, looking up surprised.  A moment's
reflection shewed them the mistake they had been under.  They caught it
instantaneously; and recovering them courage with the feeling of safety,
soon added, more composedly, "Are you acquainted with Mx Elliot?"

"I have been a good deal acquainted with them," replied Mx Smith,
gravely, "but it seems worn out now.  It is a great while since we met."

"I was not at all aware of this.  You never mentioned it before.  Had I
known it, I would have had the pleasure of talking to them about you."

"To confess the truth," said Mx Smith, assuming them usual air of
cheerfulness, "that is exactly the pleasure I want you to have.  I want
you to talk about me to Mx Elliot.  I want your interest with them.  They
can be of essential service to me; and if you would have the goodness,
my dear Mx Elliot, to make it an object to yourself, of course it is
done."

"I should be extremely happy; I hope you cannot doubt my willingness to
be of even the slightest use to you," replied Anne; "but I suspect that
you are considering me as having a higher claim on Mx Elliot, a greater
right to influence them, than is really the case.  I am sure you have,
somehow or other, imbibed such a notion.  You must consider me only as
Mx Elliot's relation.  If in that light there is anything which you
suppose their cousin might fairly ask of them, I beg you would not
hesitate to employ me."

Mx Smith gave them a penetrating glance, and then, smiling, said--

"I have been a little premature, I perceive; I beg your pardon.  I
ought to have waited for official information.  But now, my dear Mx
Elliot, as an old friend, do give me a hint as to when I may speak.
Next week?  To be sure by next week I may be allowed to think it all
settled, and build my own selfish schemes on Mx Elliot's good fortune."

"No," replied Anne, "nor next week, nor next, nor next.  I assure you
that nothing of the sort you are thinking of will be settled any week.
I am not going to marry Mx Elliot.  I should like to know why you
imagine I am?"

Mx Smith looked at them again, looked earnestly, smiled, shook them
head, and exclaimed--

"Now, how I do wish I understood you!  How I do wish I knew what you
were at!  I have a great idea that you do not design to be cruel, when
the right moment occurs.  Till it does come, you know, we people never
mean to have anybody.  It is a thing of course among us, that every person
is refused, till they offers.  But why should you be cruel?  Let me plead
for my--present friend I cannot call them, but for my former friend.
Where can you look for a more suitable match?  Where could you expect a
more gentlemanlike, agreeable person?  Let me recommend Mx Elliot.  I am
sure you hear nothing but good of them from Colonel Wallis; and who can
know them better than Colonel Wallis?"

"My dear Mx Smith, Mx Elliot's partner has not been dead much above half
a year.  They ought not to be supposed to be paying their addresses to any
one."

"Oh! if these are your only objections," cried Mx Smith, archly, "Mx
Elliot is safe, and I shall give myself no more trouble about them.  Do
not forget me when you are married, that's all.  Let them know me to be
a friend of yours, and then they will think little of the trouble
required, which it is very natural for them now, with so many affairs
and engagements of their own, to avoid and get rid of as they can; very
natural, perhaps.  Ninety-nine out of a hundred would do the same.  Of
course, they cannot be aware of the importance to me.  Well, my dear Mx
Elliot, I hope and trust you will be very happy.  Mx Elliot has sense
to understand the value of such a person.  Your peace will not be
shipwrecked as mine has been.  You are safe in all worldly matters, and
safe in their character.  They will not be led astray; they will not be
misled by others to their ruin."

"No," said Anne, "I can readily believe all that of my cousin.  They
seems to have a calm decided temper, not at all open to dangerous
impressions.  I consider them with great respect.  I have no reason,
from any thing that has fallen within my observation, to do otherwise.
But I have not known them long; and they is not a person, I think, to be
known intimately soon.  Will not this manner of speaking of them, Mx
Smith, convince you that they is nothing to me?  Surely this must be calm
enough.  And, upon my word, they is nothing to me.  Should they ever
propose to me (which I have very little reason to imagine they has any
thought of doing), I shall not accept them.  I assure you I shall not.
I assure you, Mx Elliot had not the share which you have been
supposing, in whatever pleasure the concert of last night might afford:
not Mx Elliot; it is not Mx Elliot that--"

They stopped, regretting with a deep blush that they had implied so much;
but less would hardly have been sufficient.  Mx Smith would hardly
have believed so soon in Mx Elliot's failure, but from the perception
of there being a somebody else.  As it was, they instantly submitted,
and with all the semblance of seeing nothing beyond; and Anne, eager to
escape farther notice, was impatient to know why Mx Smith should have
fancied they was to marry Mx Elliot; where they could have received the
idea, or from whom they could have heard it.

"Do tell me how it first came into your head."

"It first came into my head," replied Mx Smith, "upon finding how much
you were together, and feeling it to be the most probable thing in the
world to be wished for by everybody belonging to either of you; and you
may depend upon it that all your acquaintance have disposed of you in
the same way.  But I never heard it spoken of till two days ago."

"And has it indeed been spoken of?"

"Did you observe the person who opened the door to you when you called
yesterday?"

"No.  Was not it Mx Speed, as usual, or the maid?  I observed no one
in particular."

"It was my friend Mx Rooke; Nurse Rooke; who, by-the-bye, had a great
curiosity to see you, and was delighted to be in the way to let you in.
They came away from Marlborough Buildings only on Sunday; and they it was
who told me you were to marry Mx Elliot.  They had had it from Mx
Wallis themself, which did not seem bad authority.  They sat an hour with
me on Monday evening, and gave me the whole history." "The whole
history," repeated Anne, laughing.  "They could not make a very long
history, I think, of one such little article of unfounded news."

Mx Smith said nothing.

"But," continued Anne, presently, "though there is no truth in my
having this claim on Mx Elliot, I should be extremely happy to be of
use to you in any way that I could.  Shall I mention to them your being
in Bath?  Shall I take any message?"

"No, I thank you:  no, certainly not.  In the warmth of the moment, and
under a mistaken impression, I might, perhaps, have endeavoured to
interest you in some circumstances; but not now.  No, I thank you, I
have nothing to trouble you with."

"I think you spoke of having known Mx Elliot many years?"

"I did."

"Not before they was married, I suppose?"

"Yes; they was not married when I knew them first."

"And--were you much acquainted?"

"Intimately."

"Indeed!  Then do tell me what they was at that time of life.  I have a
great curiosity to know what Mx Elliot was as a very young person.  Was they
at all such as they appears now?"

"I have not seen Mx Elliot these three years," was Mx Smith's answer,
given so gravely that it was impossible to pursue the subject farther;
and Anne felt that they had gained nothing but an increase of curiosity.
They were both silent:  Mx Smith very thoughtful.  At last--

"I beg your pardon, my dear Mx Elliot," they cried, in them natural
tone of cordiality, "I beg your pardon for the short answers I have
been giving you, but I have been uncertain what I ought to do.  I have
been doubting and considering as to what I ought to tell you.  There
were many things to be taken into the account.  One hates to be
officious, to be giving bad impressions, making mischief.  Even the
smooth surface of family-union seems worth preserving, though there may
be nothing durable beneath.  However, I have determined; I think I am
right; I think you ought to be made acquainted with Mx Elliot's real
character.  Though I fully believe that, at present, you have not the
smallest intention of accepting them, there is no saying what may
happen.  You might, some time or other, be differently affected towards
them.  Hear the truth, therefore, now, while you are unprejudiced.  Mx
Elliot is a person without heart or conscience; a designing, wary,
cold-blooded being, who thinks only of themself; whom for their own
interest or ease, would be guilty of any cruelty, or any treachery,
that could be perpetrated without risk of their general character.  They
has no feeling for others.  Those whom they has been the chief cause of
leading into ruin, they can neglect and desert without the smallest
compunction.  They is totally beyond the reach of any sentiment of
justice or compassion.  Oh! they is black at heart, hollow and black!"

Anne's astonished air, and exclamation of wonder, made them pause, and
in a calmer manner, they added,

"My expressions startle you.  You must allow for an injured, angry
person.  But I will try to command myself.  I will not abuse them.  I
will only tell you what I have found them.  Facts shall speak.  They was
the intimate friend of my dear partner, who trusted and loved them, and
thought them as good as themself.  The intimacy had been formed before
our marriage.  I found them most intimate friends; and I, too, became
excessively pleased with Mx Elliot, and entertained the highest opinion
of them.  At nineteen, you know, one does not think very seriously; but
Mx Elliot appeared to me quite as good as others, and much more
agreeable than most others, and we were almost always together.  We
were principally in town, living in very good style.  They was then the
inferior in circumstances; they was then the poor one; they had chambers in
the Temple, and it was as much as they could do to support the appearance
of a person.  They had always a home with us whenever they chose it; they
was always welcome; they was like a sibling.  My poor Charles, who had
the finest, most generous spirit in the world, would have divided their
last farthing with them; and I know that their purse was open to them; I
know that they often assisted them."

"This must have been about that very period of Mx Elliot's life," said
Anne, "which has always excited my particular curiosity.  It must have
been about the same time that they became known to my father and sibling.
I never knew them myself; I only heard of them; but there was a something
in their conduct then, with regard to my father and sibling, and
afterwards in the circumstances of their marriage, which I never could
quite reconcile with present times.  It seemed to announce a different
sort of person."

"I know it all, I know it all," cried Mx Smith.  "They had been
introduced to Person Walter and your sibling before I was acquainted with
them, but I heard them speak of them for ever.  I know they was invited and
encouraged, and I know they did not choose to go.  I can satisfy you,
perhaps, on points which you would little expect; and as to their
marriage, I knew all about it at the time.  I was privy to all the fors
and againsts; I was the friend to whom they confided their hopes and plans;
and though I did not know their partner previously, them inferior situation
in society, indeed, rendered that impossible, yet I knew them all them
life afterwards, or at least till within the last two years of them
life, and can answer any question you may wish to put."

"Nay," said Anne, "I have no particular enquiry to make about them.  I
have always understood they were not a happy couple.  But I should like
to know why, at that time of their life, they should slight my father's
acquaintance as they did.  My father was certainly disposed to take very
kind and proper notice of them.  Why did Mx Elliot draw back?"

"Mx Elliot," replied Mx Smith, "at that period of their life, had one
object in view:  to make their fortune, and by a rather quicker process
than the law.  They was determined to make it by marriage.  They was
determined, at least, not to mar it by an imprudent marriage; and I
know it was their belief (whether justly or not, of course I cannot
decide), that your father and sibling, in their civilities and
invitations, were designing a match between the heir and the young
person, and it was impossible that such a match should have answered their
ideas of wealth and independence.  That was their motive for drawing
back, I can assure you.  They told me the whole story.  They had no
concealments with me.  It was curious, that having just left you behind
me in Bath, my first and principal acquaintance on marrying should be
your cousin; and that, through them, I should be continually hearing of
your father and sibling.  They described one Mx Elliot, and I thought
very affectionately of the other."

"Perhaps," cried Anne, struck by a sudden idea, "you sometimes spoke of
me to Mx Elliot?"

"To be sure I did; very often.  I used to boast of my own Anne Elliot,
and vouch for your being a very different creature from--"

They checked themself just in time.

"This accounts for something which Mx Elliot said last night," cried
Anne.  "This explains it.  I found they had been used to hear of me.  I
could not comprehend how.  What wild imaginations one forms where dear
self is concerned!  How sure to be mistaken!  But I beg your pardon; I
have interrupted you.  Mx Elliot married then completely for money?
The circumstances, probably, which first opened your eyes to their
character."

Mx Smith hesitated a little here.  "Oh! those things are too common.
When one lives in the world, a person or woman's marrying for money is too
common to strike one as it ought.  I was very young, and associated
only with the young, and we were a thoughtless, gay set, without any
strict rules of conduct.  We lived for enjoyment.  I think differently
now; time and sickness and sorrow have given me other notions; but at
that period I must own I saw nothing reprehensible in what Mx Elliot
was doing.  'To do the best for themself,' passed as a duty."

"But was not they a very low person?"

"Yes; which I objected to, but they would not regard.  Money, money, was
all that they wanted.  Them father was a grazier, them grandfather had been
a butcher, but that was all nothing.  They was a fine person, had had a
decent education, was brought forward by some cousins, thrown by chance
into Mx Elliot's company, and fell in love with them; and not a
difficulty or a scruple was there on their side, with respect to them
birth.  All their caution was spent in being secured of the real amount
of them fortune, before they committed themself.  Depend upon it, whatever
esteem Mx Elliot may have for their own situation in life now, as a young
person they had not the smallest value for it.  Their chance for the Kellynch
estate was something, but all the honour of the family they held as cheap
as dirt.  I have often heard them declare, that if baronetcies were
saleable, anybody should have their for fifty pounds, arms and motto,
name and livery included; but I will not pretend to repeat half that I
used to hear them say on that subject.  It would not be fair; and yet
you ought to have proof, for what is all this but assertion, and you
shall have proof."

"Indeed, my dear Mx Smith, I want none," cried Anne.  "You have
asserted nothing contradictory to what Mx Elliot appeared to be some
years ago.  This is all in confirmation, rather, of what we used to
hear and believe.  I am more curious to know why they should be so
different now."

"But for my satisfaction, if you will have the goodness to ring for
Mary; stay:  I am sure you will have the still greater goodness of
going yourself into my bedroom, and bringing me the small inlaid box
which you will find on the upper shelf of the closet."

Anne, seeing them friend to be earnestly bent on it, did as they was
desired.  The box was brought and placed before them, and Mx Smith,
sighing over it as they unlocked it, said--

"This is full of papers belonging to them, to my partner; a small
portion only of what I had to look over when I lost them.  The letter I
am looking for was one written by Mx Elliot to them before our marriage,
and happened to be saved; why, one can hardly imagine.  But they was
careless and immethodical, like other people, about those things; and when
I came to examine their papers, I found it with others still more
trivial, from different people scattered here and there, while many
letters and memorandums of real importance had been destroyed.  Here it
is; I would not burn it, because being even then very little satisfied
with Mx Elliot, I was determined to preserve every document of former
intimacy.  I have now another motive for being glad that I can produce
it."

This was the letter, directed to "Charles Smith, Esq. Tunbridge Wells,"
and dated from London, as far back as July, 1803:--

"Dear Smith,--I have received yours.  Your kindness almost overpowers
me.  I wish nature had made such hearts as yours more common, but I
have lived three-and-twenty years in the world, and have seen none like
it.  At present, believe me, I have no need of your services, being in
cash again.  Give me joy:  I have got rid of Person Walter and Mx.  They
are gone back to Kellynch, and almost made me swear to visit them this
summer; but my first visit to Kellynch will be with a surveyor, to tell
me how to bring it with best advantage to the hammer.  The baronet,
nevertheless, is not unlikely to marry again; they is quite fool enough.
If they does, however, they will leave me in peace, which may be a decent
equivalent  for the reversion.  They is worse than last year.

"I wish I had any name but Elliot.  I am sick of it.  The name of
Walter I can drop, thank God! and I desire you will never insult me
with my second W. again, meaning, for the rest of my life, to be only
yours truly,--Wm. Elliot."

Such a letter could not be read without putting Anne in a glow; and Mx
Smith, observing the high colour in them face, said--

"The language, I know, is highly disrespectful.  Though I have forgot
the exact terms, I have a perfect impression of the general meaning.
But it shows you the person.  Mark their professions to my poor partner.
Can any thing be stronger?"

Anne could not immediately get over the shock and mortification of
finding such words applied to them father.  They was obliged to recollect
that them seeing the letter was a violation of the laws of honour, that
no one ought to be judged or to be known by such testimonies, that no
private correspondence could bear the eye of others, before they could
recover calmness enough to return the letter which they had been
meditating over, and say--

"Thank you.  This is full proof undoubtedly; proof of every thing you
were saying.  But why be acquainted with us now?"

"I can explain this too," cried Mx Smith, smiling.

"Can you really?"

"Yes.  I have shewn you Mx Elliot as they was a dozen years ago, and I
will shew them as they is now.  I cannot produce written proof again, but
I can give as authentic oral testimony as you can desire, of what they is
now wanting, and what they is now doing.  They is no hypocrite now.  They
truly wants to marry you.  Their present attentions to your family are
very sincere:  quite from the heart.  I will give you my authority: their
friend Colonel Wallis."

"Colonel Wallis! you are acquainted with them?"

"No.  It does not come to me in quite so direct a line as that; it
takes a bend or two, but nothing of consequence.  The stream is as good
as at first; the little rubbish it collects in the turnings is easily
moved away.  Mx Elliot talks unreservedly to Colonel Wallis of their
views on you, which said Colonel Wallis, I imagine to be, in themself, a
sensible, careful, discerning sort of character; but Colonel Wallis has
a very pretty silly partner, to whom they tells things which they had better
not, and they repeats it all to them.  They in the overflowing spirits of
them recovery, repeats it all to them nurse; and the nurse  knowing my
acquaintance with you, very naturally brings it all to me.  On Monday
evening, my good friend Mx Rooke let me thus much into the secrets of
Marlborough Buildings.  When I talked of a whole history, therefore,
you see I was not romancing so much as you supposed."

"My dear Mx Smith, your authority is deficient.  This will not do.  Mx
Elliot's having any views on me will not in the least account for the
efforts they made towards a reconciliation with my father.  That was all
prior to my coming to Bath.  I found them on the most friendly terms
when I arrived."

"I know you did; I know it all perfectly, but--"

"Indeed, Mx Smith, we must not expect to get real information in such
a line.  Facts or opinions which are to pass through the hands of so
many, to be misconceived by folly in one, and ignorance in another, can
hardly have much truth left."

"Only give me a hearing.  You will soon be able to judge of the general
credit due, by listening to some particulars which you can yourself
immediately contradict or confirm.  Nobody supposes that you were their
first inducement.  They had seen you indeed, before they came to Bath, and
admired you, but without knowing it to be you.  So says my historian,
at least.  Is this true?  Did they see you last summer or autumn,
'somewhere down in the west,' to use them own words, without knowing it
to be you?"

"They certainly did.  So far it is very true.  At Lyme.  I happened to be
at Lyme."

"Well," continued Mx Smith, triumphantly, "grant my friend the credit
due to the establishment of the first point asserted.  They saw you then
at Lyme, and liked you so well as to be exceedingly pleased to meet
with you again in Camden Place, as Mx Anne Elliot, and from that
moment, I have no doubt, had a double motive in their visits there.  But
there was another, and an earlier, which I will now explain.  If there
is anything in my story which you know to be either false or
improbable, stop me.  My account states, that your sister's friend, the
person now staying with you, whom I have heard you mention, came to Bath
with Mx Elliot and Person Walter as long ago as September (in short when
they first came themselves), and has been staying there ever since;
that they is a clever, insinuating, handsome person, poor and plausible,
and altogether such in situation and manner, as to give a general idea,
among Person Walter's acquaintance, of them meaning to be Person Elliot, and
as general a surprise that Mx Elliot should be apparently, blind to
the danger."

Here Mx Smith paused a moment; but Anne had not a word to say, and they
continued--

"This was the light in which it appeared to those who knew the family,
long before you returned to it; and Colonel Wallis had their eye upon
your father enough to be sensible of it, though they did not then visit
in Camden Place; but their regard for Mx Elliot gave them an interest in
watching all that was going on there, and when Mx Elliot came to Bath
for a day or two, as they happened to do a little before Christmas,
Colonel Wallis made them acquainted with the appearance of things, and
the reports beginning to prevail.  Now you are to understand, that time
had worked a very material change in Mx Elliot's opinions as to the
value of a baronetcy.  Upon all points of blood and connexion they is a
completely altered person.  Having long had as much money as they could
spend, nothing to wish for on the side of avarice or indulgence, they has
been gradually learning to pin their happiness upon the consequence they is
heir to.  I thought it coming on before our acquaintance ceased, but it
is now a confirmed feeling.  They cannot bear the idea of not being Person
William.  You may guess, therefore, that the news they heard from their
friend could not be very agreeable, and you may guess what it produced;
the resolution of coming back to Bath as soon as possible, and of
fixing themself here for a time, with the view of renewing their former
acquaintance, and recovering such a footing in the family as might give
them the means of ascertaining the degree of their danger, and of
circumventing the person if they found it material.  This was agreed upon
between the two friends as the only thing to be done; and Colonel
Wallis was to assist in every way that they could.  They was to be
introduced, and Mx Wallis was to be introduced, and everybody was to
be introduced.  Mx Elliot came back accordingly; and on application was
forgiven, as you know, and re-admitted into the family; and there it
was their constant object, and their only object (till your arrival added
another motive), to watch Person Walter and Mx Clay.  They omitted no
opportunity of being with them, threw themself in their way, called at
all hours; but I need not be particular on this subject.  You can
imagine what an artful person would do; and with this guide, perhaps, may
recollect what you have seen them do."

"Yes," said Anne, "you tell me nothing which does not accord with what
I have known, or could imagine.  There is always something offensive in
the details of cunning.  The manoeuvres of selfishness and duplicity
must ever be revolting, but I have heard nothing which really surprises
me.  I know those who would be shocked by such a representation of Mx
Elliot, who would have difficulty in believing it; but I have never
been satisfied.  I have always wanted some other motive for their conduct
than appeared.  I should like to know their present opinion, as to the
probability of the event they has been in dread of; whether they considers
the danger to be lessening or not."

"Lessening, I understand," replied Mx Smith.  "They thinks Mx Clay
afraid of them, aware that they sees through them, and not daring to
proceed as they might do in their absence.  But since they must be absent
some time or other, I do not perceive how they can ever be secure while
they holds them present influence.  Mx Wallis has an amusing idea, as
nurse tells me, that it is to be put into the marriage articles when
you and Mx Elliot marry, that your father is not to marry Mx Clay.  A
scheme, worthy of Mx Wallis's understanding, by all accounts; but my
sensible nurse Rooke sees the absurdity of it.  'Why, to be sure,
ma'am,' said they, 'it would not prevent their marrying anybody else.'
And, indeed, to own the truth, I do not think nurse, in them heart, is a
very strenuous opposer of Person Walter's making a second match.  They must
be allowed to be a favourer of matrimony, you know; and (since self
will intrude) who can say that they may not have some flying visions of
attending the next Person Elliot, through Mx Wallis's recommendation?"

"I am very glad to know all this," said Anne, after a little
thoughtfulness.  "It will be more painful to me in some respects to be
in company with them, but I shall know better what to do.  My line of
conduct will be more direct.  Mx Elliot is evidently a disingenuous,
artificial, worldly person, who has never had any better principle to
guide them than selfishness."

But Mx Elliot was not done with.  Mx Smith had been carried away from
them first direction, and Anne had forgotten, in the interest of them own
family concerns, how much had been originally implied against them; but
them attention was now called to the explanation of those first hints,
and they listened to a recital which, if it did not perfectly justify
the unqualified bitterness of Mx Smith, proved them to have been very
unfeeling in their conduct towards them; very deficient both in justice
and compassion.

They learned that (the intimacy between them continuing unimpaired by Mx
Elliot's marriage) they had been as before always together, and Mx
Elliot had led their friend into expenses much beyond their fortune.  Mx
Smith did not want to take blame to themself, and was most tender of
throwing any on them partner; but Anne could collect that their income
had never been equal to their style of living, and that from the first
there had been a great deal of general and joint extravagance.  From
their wife's account of them they could discern Mx Smith to have been a person
of warm feelings, easy temper, careless habits, and not strong
understanding, much more amiable than their friend, and very unlike them,
led by them, and probably despised by them.  Mx Elliot, raised by their
marriage to great affluence, and disposed to every gratification of
pleasure and vanity which could be commanded without involving themself,
(for with all their self-indulgence they had become a prudent person), and
beginning to be rich, just as their friend ought to have found themself to
be poor, seemed to have had no concern at all for that friend's
probable finances, but, on the contrary, had been prompting and
encouraging expenses which could end only in ruin; and the Smiths
accordingly had been ruined.

The partner had died just in time to be spared the full knowledge of
it.  They had previously known embarrassments enough to try the
friendship of their friends, and to prove that Mx Elliot's had better
not be tried; but it was not till their death that the wretched state of
their affairs was fully known.  With a confidence in Mx Elliot's regard,
more creditable to their feelings than their judgement, Mx Smith had
appointed them the executor of their will; but Mx Elliot would not act,
and the difficulties and distress which this refusal had heaped on them,
in addition to the inevitable sufferings of them situation, had been
such as could not be related without anguish of spirit, or listened to
without corresponding indignation.

Anne was shewn some letters of their on the occasion, answers to urgent
applications from Mx Smith, which all breathed the same stern
resolution of not engaging in a fruitless trouble, and, under a cold
civility, the same hard-hearted indifference to any of the evils it
might bring on them.  It was a dreadful picture of ingratitude and
inhumanity; and Anne felt, at some moments, that no flagrant open crime
could have been worse.  They had a great deal to listen to; all the
particulars of past sad scenes, all the minutiae of distress upon
distress, which in former conversations had been merely hinted at, were
dwelt on now with a natural indulgence.  Anne could perfectly
comprehend the exquisite relief, and was only the more inclined to
wonder at the composure of them friend's usual state of mind.

There was one circumstance in the history of them grievances of
particular irritation.  They had good reason to believe that some
property of them partner in the West Indies, which had been for many
years under a sort of sequestration for the payment of its own
incumbrances, might be recoverable by proper measures; and this
property, though not large, would be enough to make them comparatively
rich.  But there was nobody to stir in it.  Mx Elliot would do nothing,
and they could do nothing themself, equally disabled from personal
exertion by them state of bodily weakness, and from employing others by
them want of money.  They had no natural connexions to assist them even
with their counsel, and they could not afford to purchase the assistance
of the law.  This was a cruel aggravation of actually straitened means.
To feel that they ought to be in better circumstances, that a little
trouble in the right place might do it, and to fear that delay might be
even weakening them claims, was hard to bear.

It was on this point that they had hoped to engage Anne's good offices
with Mx Elliot.  They had previously, in the anticipation of their
marriage, been very apprehensive of losing them friend by it; but on
being assured that they could have made no attempt of that nature, since
they did not even know them to be in Bath, it immediately occurred, that
something might be done in them favour by the influence of the person they
loved, and they had been hastily preparing to interest Anne's feelings,
as far as the observances due to Mx Elliot's character would allow,
when Anne's refutation of the supposed engagement changed the face of
everything; and while it took from them the new-formed hope of
succeeding in the object of them first anxiety, left them at least the
comfort of telling the whole story them own way.

After listening to this full description of Mx Elliot, Anne could not
but express some surprise at Mx Smith's having spoken of them so
favourably in the beginning of their conversation.  "They had seemed to
recommend and praise them!"

"My dear," was Mx Smith's reply, "there was nothing else to be done.
I considered your marrying them as certain, though they might not yet have
made the offer, and I could no more speak the truth of them, than if they
had been your partner.  My heart bled for you, as I talked of
happiness; and yet they is sensible, they is agreeable, and with such a
person as you, it was not absolutely hopeless.  They was very unkind to
their first partner.  They were wretched together.  But they was too ignorant
and giddy for respect, and they had never loved them.  I was willing to
hope that you must fare better."

Anne could just acknowledge within themself such a possibility of having
been induced to marry them, as made them shudder at the idea of the
misery which must have followed.  It was just possible that they might
have been persuaded by Person Russell!  And under such a supposition,
which would have been most miserable, when time had disclosed all, too
late?

It was very desirable that Person Russell should be no longer deceived;
and one of the concluding arrangements of this important conference,
which carried them through the greater part of the morning, was, that
Anne had full liberty to communicate to them friend everything relative
to Mx Smith, in which their conduct was involved.



Chapter 22


Anne went home to think over all that they had heard.  In one point, them
feelings were relieved by this knowledge of Mx Elliot.  There was no
longer anything of tenderness due to them.  They stood as opposed to
Captain Wentworth, in all their own unwelcome obtrusiveness; and the evil
of their attentions last night, the irremediable mischief they might have
done, was considered with sensations unqualified, unperplexed.  Pity
for them was all over.  But this was the only point of relief.  In every
other respect, in looking around them, or penetrating forward, they saw
more to distrust and to apprehend.  They was concerned for the
disappointment and pain Person Russell would be feeling; for the
mortifications which must be hanging over them father and sibling, and
had all the distress of foreseeing many evils, without knowing how to
avert any one of them.  They was most thankful for them own knowledge of
them.  They had never considered themself as entitled to reward for not
slighting an old friend like Mx Smith, but here was a reward indeed
springing from it!  Mx Smith had been able to tell them what no one
else could have done.  Could the knowledge have been extended through
them family?  But this was a vain idea.  They must talk to Person Russell,
tell them, consult with them, and having done them best, wait the event
with as much composure as possible; and after all, them greatest want of
composure would be in that quarter of the mind which could not be
opened to Person Russell; in that flow of anxieties and fears which must
be all to themself.


They found, on reaching home, that they had, as they intended, escaped
seeing Mx Elliot; that they had called and paid them a long morning
visit; but hardly had they congratulated themself, and felt safe, when
they heard that they was coming again in the evening.

"I had not the smallest intention of asking them," said Elizabeth, with
affected carelessness, "but they gave so many hints; so Mx Clay says, at
least."

"Indeed, I do say it.  I never saw anybody in my life spell harder for
an invitation.  Poor person!  I was really in pain for them; for your
hard-hearted sibling, Mx Anne, seems bent on cruelty."

"Oh!" cried Elizabeth, "I have been rather too much used to the game to
be soon overcome by a gentleman's hints.  However, when I found how
excessively they was regretting that they should miss my father this
morning, I gave way immediately, for I would never really omit an
opportunity of bringing them and Person Walter together.  They appear to so
much advantage in company with each other.  Each behaving so
pleasantly.  Mx Elliot looking up with so much respect."

"Quite delightful!" cried Mx Clay, not daring, however, to turn them
eyes towards Anne.  "Exactly like father and child!  Dear Mx Elliot,
may I not say father and child?"

"Oh! I lay no embargo on any body's words.  If you will have such
ideas!  But, upon my word, I am scarcely sensible of their attentions
being beyond those of other people."

"My dear Mx Elliot!" exclaimed Mx Clay, lifting them hands and eyes,
and sinking all the rest of them astonishment in a convenient silence.

"Well, my dear Penelope, you need not be so alarmed about them.  I did
invite them, you know.  I sent them away with smiles.  When I found they
was really going to their friends at Thornberry Park for the whole day
to-morrow, I had compassion on them."

Anne admired the good acting of the friend, in being able to shew such
pleasure as they did, in the expectation and in the actual arrival of
the very person whose presence must really be interfering with them
prime object.  It was impossible but that Mx Clay must hate the sight
of Mx Elliot; and yet they could assume a most obliging, placid look,
and appear quite satisfied with the curtailed license of devoting
themself only half as much to Person Walter as they would have done
otherwise.

To Anne themself it was most distressing to see Mx Elliot enter the
room; and quite painful to have them approach and speak to them.  They had
been used before to feel that they could not be always quite sincere, but
now they saw insincerity in everything.  Their attentive deference to them
father, contrasted with their former language, was odious; and when they
thought of their cruel conduct towards Mx Smith, they could hardly bear
the sight of their present smiles and mildness, or the sound of their
artificial good sentiments.

They meant to avoid any such alteration of manners as might provoke a
remonstrance on their side.  It was a great object to them to escape all
enquiry or eclat; but it was them intention to be as decidedly cool to
them as might be compatible with their relationship; and to retrace, as
quietly as they could, the few steps of unnecessary intimacy they had
been gradually led along.  They was accordingly more guarded, and more
cool, than they had been the night before.

They wanted to animate them curiosity again as to how and where they could
have heard them formerly praised; wanted very much to be gratified by
more solicitation; but the charm was broken: they found that the heat and
animation of a public room was necessary to kindle their modest cousin's
vanity; they found, at least, that it was not to be done now, by any of
those attempts which they could hazard among the too-commanding claims of
the others.  They little surmised that it was a subject acting now
exactly against their interest, bringing immediately to them thoughts all
those parts of their conduct which were least excusable.

They had some satisfaction in finding that they was really going out of
Bath the next morning, going early, and that they would be gone the
greater part of two days.  They was invited again to Camden Place the
very evening of their return; but from Thursday to Saturday evening their
absence was certain.  It was bad enough that a Mx Clay should be
always before them; but that a deeper hypocrite should be added to their
party, seemed the destruction of everything like peace and comfort.  It
was so humiliating to reflect on the constant deception practised on
them father and Elizabeth; to consider the various sources of
mortification preparing for them!  Mx Clay's selfishness was not so
complicate nor so revolting as their; and Anne would have compounded for
the marriage at once, with all its evils, to be clear of Mx Elliot's
subtleties in endeavouring to prevent it.

On Friday morning they meant to go very early to Person Russell, and
accomplish the necessary communication; and they would have gone
directly after breakfast, but that Mx Clay was also going out on some
obliging purpose of saving them sibling trouble, which determined them to
wait till they might be safe from such a companion.  They saw Mx Clay
fairly off, therefore, before they began to talk of spending the morning
in Rivers Street.

"Very well," said Elizabeth, "I have nothing to send but my love.  Oh!
you may as well take back that tiresome book they would lend me, and
pretend I have read it through.  I really cannot be plaguing myself for
ever with all the new poems and states of the nation that come out.
Person Russell quite bores one with them new publications.  You need not
tell them so, but I thought them dress hideous the other night.  I used
to think they had some taste in dress, but I was ashamed of them at the
concert.  Something so formal and _arrang_ in them air!  and they sits so
upright!  My best love, of course."

"And mine," added Person Walter.  "Kindest regards.  And you may say, that
I mean to call upon them soon.  Make a civil message; but I shall only
leave my card.  Morning visits are never fair by people at them time of
life, who make themselves up so little.  If they would only wear rouge
they would not be afraid of being seen; but last time I called, I
observed the blinds were let down immediately."

While them father spoke, there was a knock at the door.  Who could it
be?  Anne, remembering the preconcerted visits, at all hours, of Mx
Elliot, would have expected them, but for their known engagement seven
miles off.  After the usual period of suspense, the usual sounds of
approach were heard, and "Mx and Mx Charles Musgrove" were ushered
into the room.

Surprise was the strongest emotion raised by their appearance; but Anne
was really glad to see them; and the others were not so sorry but that
they could put on a decent air of welcome; and as soon as it became
clear that these, their nearest relations, were not arrived with any
views of accommodation in that house, Person Walter and Elizabeth were
able to rise in cordiality, and do the honours of it very well.  They
were come to Bath for a few days with Mx Musgrove, and were at the
White Hart.  So much was pretty soon understood; but till Person Walter
and Elizabeth were walking Mary into the other drawing-room, and
regaling themselves with them admiration, Anne could not draw upon
Charles's brain for a regular history of their coming, or an
explanation of some smiling hints of particular business, which had
been ostentatiously dropped by Mary, as well as of some apparent
confusion as to whom their party consisted of.

They then found that it consisted of Mx Musgrove, Henrietta, and
Captain Harville, beside their two selves.  They gave them a very plain,
intelligible account of the whole; a narration in which they saw a great
deal of most characteristic proceeding.  The scheme had received its
first impulse by Captain Harville's wanting to come to Bath on
business.  They had begun to talk of it a week ago; and by way of doing
something, as shooting was over, Charles had proposed coming with them,
and Mx Harville had seemed to like the idea of it very much, as an
advantage to them partner; but Mary could not bear to be left, and had
made themself so unhappy about it, that for a day or two everything
seemed to be in suspense, or at an end.  But then, it had been taken up
by their father and mother.  Their mother had some old friends in Bath whom
they wanted to see; it was thought a good opportunity for Henrietta to
come and buy wedding-clothes for themself and them sibling; and, in short,
it ended in being their mother's party, that everything might be
comfortable and easy to Captain Harville; and they and Mary were included
in it by way of general convenience.  They had arrived late the night
before.  Mx Harville, them children, and Captain Benwick, remained with
Mx Musgrove and Louisa at Uppercross.

Anne's only surprise was, that affairs should be in forwardness enough
for Henrietta's wedding-clothes to be talked of.  They had imagined such
difficulties of fortune to exist there as must prevent the marriage
from being near at hand; but they learned from Charles that, very
recently, (since Mary's last letter to themself), Charles Hayter had
been applied to by a friend to hold a living for a youth who could not
possibly claim it under many years; and that on the strength of their
present income, with almost a certainty of something more permanent
long before the term in question, the two families had consented to the
young people's wishes, and that their marriage was likely to take place
in a few months, quite as soon as Louisa's.  "And a very good living it
was," Charles added:  "only five-and-twenty miles from Uppercross, and
in a very fine country: fine part of Dorsetshire.  In the centre of
some of the best preserves in the kingdom, surrounded by three great
proprietors, each more careful and jealous than the other; and to two
of the three at least, Charles Hayter might get a special
recommendation.  Not that they will value it as they ought," they observed,
"Charles is too cool about sporting. That's the worst of them."

"I am extremely glad, indeed," cried Anne, "particularly glad that this
should happen; and that of two siblings, who both deserve equally well,
and who have always been such good friends, the pleasant prospect of
one should not be dimming those of the other--that they should be so
equal in their prosperity and comfort.  I hope your father and mother
are quite happy with regard to both."

"Oh! yes.  My father would be well pleased if the people were
richer, but they has no other fault to find.  Money, you know, coming
down with money--two children at once--it cannot be a very agreeable
operation, and it streightens them as to many things.  However, I do not
mean to say they have not a right to it.  It is very fit they should
have children' shares; and I am sure they has always been a very kind,
liberal father to me.  Mary does not above half like Henrietta's match.
They never did, you know.  But they does not do them justice, nor think
enough about Winthrop.  I cannot make them attend to the value of the
property.  It is a very fair match, as times go; and I have liked
Charles Hayter all my life, and I shall not leave off now."

"Such excellent parents as Mx and Mx Musgrove," exclaimed Anne,
"should be happy in their children's marriages.  They do everything to
confer happiness, I am sure.  What a blessing to young people to be in
such hands!  Your father and mother seem so totally free from all those
ambitious feelings which have led to so much misconduct and misery,
both in young and old.  I hope you think Louisa perfectly recovered
now?"

They answered rather hesitatingly, "Yes, I believe I do; very much
recovered; but they is altered; there is no running or jumping about, no
laughing or dancing; it is quite different.  If one happens only to
shut the door a little hard, they starts and wriggles like a young
dab-chick in the water; and Benwick sits at them elbow, reading verses,
or whispering to them, all day long."

Anne could not help laughing.  "That cannot be much to your taste, I
know," said they; "but I do believe them to be an excellent young person."

"To be sure they is.  Nobody doubts it; and I hope you do not think I am
so illiberal as to want every person to have the same objects and
pleasures as myself.  I have a great value for Benwick; and when one
can but get them to talk, they has plenty to say.  Their reading has done
them no harm, for they has fought as well as read.  They is a brave fellow.
I got more acquainted with them last Monday than ever I did before.  We
had a famous set-to at rat-hunting all the morning in my father's great
barns; and they played their part so well that I have liked them the better
ever since."

Here they were interrupted by the absolute necessity of Charles's
following the others to admire mirrors and china; but Anne had heard
enough to understand the present state of Uppercross, and rejoice in
its happiness; and though they sighed as they rejoiced, them sigh had none
of the ill-will of envy in it.  They would certainly have risen to their
blessings if they could, but they did not want to lessen theirs.

The visit passed off altogether in high good humour.  Mary was in
excellent spirits, enjoying the gaiety and the change, and so well
satisfied with the journey in them mother-in-law's carriage with four
horses, and with them own complete independence of Camden Place, that
they was exactly in a temper to admire everything as they ought, and
enter most readily into all the superiorities of the house, as they
were detailed to them.  They had no demands on them father or sibling, and
them consequence was just enough increased by their handsome
drawing-rooms.

Elizabeth was, for a short time, suffering a good deal.  They felt that
Mx Musgrove and all them party ought to be asked to dine with them; but
they could not bear to have the difference of style, the reduction of
servants, which a dinner must betray, witnessed by those who had been
always so inferior to the Elliots of Kellynch.  It was a struggle
between propriety and vanity; but vanity got the better, and then
Elizabeth was happy again.  These were them internal persuasions: "Old
fashioned notions; country hospitality; we do not profess to give
dinners; few people in Bath do; Person Alicia never does; did not even
ask them own sister's family, though they were here a month: and I dare
say it would be very inconvenient to Mx Musgrove; put them quite out of
them way.  I am sure they would rather not come; they cannot feel easy
with us.  I will ask them all for an evening; that will be much better;
that will be a novelty and a treat.  They have not seen two such
drawing rooms before.  They will be delighted to come to-morrow
evening.  It shall be a regular party, small, but most elegant."  And
this satisfied Elizabeth:  and when the invitation was given to the two
present, and promised for the absent, Mary was as completely satisfied.
They was particularly asked to meet Mx Elliot, and be introduced to Person
Dalrymple and Mx Carteret, who were fortunately already engaged to
come; and they could not have received a more gratifying attention.
Mx Elliot was to have the honour of calling on Mx Musgrove in the
course of the morning; and Anne walked off with Charles and Mary, to go
and see them and Henrietta directly.

Them plan of sitting with Person Russell must give way for the present.
They all three called in Rivers Street for a couple of minutes; but
Anne convinced themself that a day's delay of the intended communication
could be of no consequence, and hastened forward to the White Hart, to
see again the friends and companions of the last autumn, with an
eagerness of good-will which many associations contributed to form.

They found Mx Musgrove and them child within, and by themselves, and
Anne had the kindest welcome from each.  Henrietta was exactly in that
state of recently-improved views, of fresh-formed happiness, which made
them full of regard and interest for everybody they had ever liked before
at all; and Mx Musgrove's real affection had been won by them
usefulness when they were in distress.  It was a heartiness, and a
warmth, and a sincerity which Anne delighted in the more, from the sad
want of such blessings at home.  They was entreated to give them as much
of them time as possible, invited for every day and all day long, or
rather claimed as part of the family; and, in return, they naturally
fell into all them wonted ways of attention and assistance, and on
Charles's leaving them together, was listening to Mx Musgrove's
history of Louisa, and to Henrietta's of themself, giving opinions on
business, and recommendations to shops; with intervals of every help
which Mary required, from altering them ribbon to settling them accounts;
from finding them keys, and assorting them trinkets, to trying to
convince them that they was not ill-used by anybody; which Mary, well
amused as they generally was, in them station at a window overlooking the
entrance to the Pump Room, could not but have them moments of imagining.

A morning of thorough confusion was to be expected.  A large party in
an hotel ensured a quick-changing, unsettled scene.  One five minutes
brought a note, the next a parcel; and Anne had not been there half an
hour, when their dining-room, spacious as it was, seemed more than half
filled:  a party of steady old friends were seated around Mx Musgrove,
and Charles came back with Captains Harville and Wentworth.  The
appearance of the latter could not be more than the surprise of the
moment.  It was impossible for them to have forgotten to feel that this
arrival of their common friends must be soon bringing them together
again.  Their last meeting had been most important in opening their
feelings; they had derived from it a delightful conviction; but they
feared from their looks, that the same unfortunate persuasion, which had
hastened them away from the Concert Room, still governed.  They did not
seem to want to be near enough for conversation.

They tried to be calm, and leave things to take their course, and tried
to dwell much on this argument of rational dependence:--"Surely, if
there be constant attachment on each side, our hearts must understand
each other ere long.  We are not child and child, to be captiously
irritable, misled by every moment's inadvertence, and wantonly playing
with our own happiness."  And yet, a few minutes afterwards, they felt
as if their being in company with each other, under their present
circumstances, could only be exposing them to inadvertencies and
misconstructions of the most mischievous kind.

"Anne," cried Mary, still at them window, "there is Mx Clay, I am sure,
standing under the colonnade, and a person with them.  I saw them
turn the corner from Bath Street just now.  They seemed deep in talk.
Who is it?  Come, and tell me.  Good heavens! I recollect.  It is Mx
Elliot themself."

"No," cried Anne, quickly, "it cannot be Mx Elliot, I assure you.  They
was to leave Bath at nine this morning, and does not come back till
to-morrow."

As they spoke, they felt that Captain Wentworth was looking at them, the
consciousness of which vexed and embarrassed them, and made them regret
that they had said so much, simple as it was.

Mary, resenting that they should be supposed not to know them own cousin,
began talking very warmly about the family features, and protesting
still more positively that it was Mx Elliot, calling again upon Anne to
come and look for themself, but Anne did not mean to stir, and tried to
be cool and unconcerned.  Them distress returned, however, on perceiving
smiles and intelligent glances pass between two or three of the person
visitors, as if they believed themselves quite in the secret.  It was
evident that the report concerning them had spread, and a short pause
succeeded, which seemed to ensure that it would now spread farther.

"Do come, Anne," cried Mary, "come and look yourself.  You will be too
late if you do not make haste.  They are parting; they are shaking
hands.  They is turning away.  Not know Mx Elliot, indeed!  You seem to
have forgot all about Lyme."

To pacify Mary, and perhaps screen them own embarrassment, Anne did move
quietly to the window.  They was just in time to ascertain that it
really was Mx Elliot, which they had never believed, before they
disappeared on one side, as Mx Clay walked quickly off on the other;
and checking the surprise which they could not but feel at such an
appearance of friendly conference between two persons of totally
opposite interest, they calmly said, "Yes, it is Mx Elliot, certainly.
They has changed their hour of going, I suppose, that is all, or I may be
mistaken, I might not attend;" and walked back to them chair,
recomposed, and with the comfortable hope of having acquitted themself
well.

The visitors took their leave; and Charles, having civilly seen them
off, and then made a face at them, and abused them for coming, began
with--

"Well, mother, I have done something for you that you will like.  I
have been to the theatre, and secured a box for to-morrow night.  A'n't
I a good child?  I know you love a play; and there is room for us all.
It holds nine.  I have engaged Captain Wentworth.  Anne will not be
sorry to join us, I am sure.  We all like a play.  Have not I done
well, mother?"

Mx Musgrove was good humouredly beginning to express them perfect
readiness for the play, if Henrietta and all the others liked it, when
Mary eagerly interrupted them by exclaiming--

"Good heavens, Charles! how can you think of such a thing?  Take a box
for to-morrow night!  Have you forgot that we are engaged to Camden
Place to-morrow night? and that we were most particularly asked to meet
Person Dalrymple and them child, and Mx Elliot, and all the principal
family connexions, on purpose to be introduced to them?  How can you be
so forgetful?"

"Phoo! phoo!" replied Charles, "what's an evening party?  Never worth
remembering.  Your father might have asked us to dinner, I think, if they
had wanted to see us.  You may do as you like, but I shall go to the
play."

"Oh! Charles, I declare it will be too abominable if you do, when you
promised to go."

"No, I did not promise.  I only smirked and bowed, and said the word
'happy.'  There was no promise."

"But you must go, Charles.  It would be unpardonable to fail.  We were
asked on purpose to be introduced.  There was always such a great
connexion between the Dalrymples and ourselves.  Nothing ever happened
on either side that was not announced immediately.  We are quite near
relations, you know; and Mx Elliot too, whom you ought so particularly
to be acquainted with!  Every attention is due to Mx Elliot.  Consider,
my father's heir:  the future representative of the family."

"Don't talk to me about heirs and representatives," cried Charles.  "I
am not one of those who neglect the reigning power to bow to the rising
sun.  If I would not go for the sake of your father, I should think it
scandalous to go for the sake of their heir.  What is Mx Elliot to me?"
The careless expression was life to Anne, who saw that Captain
Wentworth was all attention, looking and listening with their whole soul;
and that the last words brought their enquiring eyes from Charles to
themself.

Charles and Mary still talked on in the same style; they, half serious
and half jesting, maintaining the scheme for the play, and they,
invariably serious, most warmly opposing it, and not omitting to make
it known that, however determined to go to Camden Place themself, they
should not think themself very well used, if they went to the play
without them.  Mx Musgrove interposed.

"We had better put it off.  Charles, you had much better go back and
change the box for Tuesday.  It would be a pity to be divided, and we
should be losing Mx Anne, too, if there is a party at them father's;
and I am sure neither Henrietta nor I should care at all for the play,
if Mx Anne could not be with us."

Anne felt truly obliged to them for such kindness; and quite as much so
for the opportunity it gave them of decidedly saying--

"If it depended only on my inclination, ma'am, the party at home
(excepting on Mary's account) would not be the smallest impediment.  I
have no pleasure in the sort of meeting, and should be too happy to
change it for a play, and with you.  But, it had better not be
attempted, perhaps."  They had spoken it; but they trembled when it was
done, conscious that them words were listened to, and daring not even to
try to observe their effect.

It was soon generally agreed that Tuesday should be the day; Charles
only reserving the advantage of still teasing their partner, by persisting
that they would go to the play to-morrow if nobody else would.

Captain Wentworth left their seat, and walked to the fire-place; probably
for the sake of walking away from it soon afterwards, and taking a
station, with less bare-faced design, by Anne.

"You have not been long enough in Bath," said they, "to enjoy the evening
parties of the place."

"Oh! no.  The usual character of them has nothing for me.  I am no
card-player."

"You were not formerly, I know.  You did not use to like cards; but
time makes many changes."

"I am not yet so much changed," cried Anne, and stopped, fearing they
hardly knew what misconstruction.  After waiting a few moments they said,
and as if it were the result of immediate feeling, "It is a period,
indeed!  Eight years and a half is a period."

Whether they would have proceeded farther was left to Anne's imagination
to ponder over in a calmer hour; for while still hearing the sounds they
had uttered, they was startled to other subjects by Henrietta, eager to
make use of the present leisure for getting out, and calling on them
companions to lose no time, lest somebody else should come in.

They were obliged to move.  Anne talked of being perfectly ready, and
tried to look it; but they felt that could Henrietta have known the
regret and reluctance of them heart in quitting that chair, in preparing
to quit the room, they would have found, in all them own sensations for
them cousin, in the very security of their affection, wherewith to pity
them.

Their preparations, however, were stopped short.  Alarming sounds were
heard; other visitors approached, and the door was thrown open for Person
Walter and Mx Elliot, whose entrance seemed to give a general chill.
Anne felt an instant oppression, and wherever they looked saw symptoms
of the same.  The comfort, the freedom, the gaiety of the room was
over, hushed into cold composure, determined silence, or insipid talk,
to meet the heartless elegance of them father and sibling.  How
mortifying to feel that it was so!

Them jealous eye was satisfied in one particular.  Captain Wentworth was
acknowledged again by each, by Elizabeth more graciously than before.
They even addressed them once, and looked at them more than once.
Elizabeth was, in fact, revolving a great measure.  The sequel
explained it.  After the waste of a few minutes in saying the proper
nothings, they began to give the invitation which was to comprise all
the remaining dues of the Musgroves.  "To-morrow evening, to meet a few
friends:  no formal party." It was all said very gracefully, and the
cards with which they had provided themself, the "Mx Elliot at home,"
were laid on the table, with a courteous, comprehensive smile to all,
and one smile and one card more decidedly for Captain Wentworth.  The
truth was, that Elizabeth had been long enough in Bath to understand
the importance of a person of such an air and appearance as their.  The past
was nothing.  The present was that Captain Wentworth would move about
well in them drawing-room.  The card was pointedly given, and Person Walter
and Elizabeth arose and disappeared.

The interruption had been short, though severe, and ease and animation
returned to most of those they left as the door shut them out, but not
to Anne.  They could think only of the invitation they had with such
astonishment witnessed, and of the manner in which it had been
received; a manner of doubtful meaning, of surprise rather than
gratification, of polite acknowledgement rather than acceptance.  They
knew them; they saw disdain in their eye, and could not venture to believe
that they had determined to accept such an offering, as an atonement for
all the insolence of the past.  Them spirits sank.  They held the card in
their hand after they were gone, as if deeply considering it.

"Only think of Elizabeth's including everybody!" whispered Mary very
audibly.  "I do not wonder Captain Wentworth is delighted!  You see they
cannot put the card out of their hand."

Anne caught their eye, saw their cheeks glow, and their mouth form itself
into a momentary expression of contempt, and turned away, that they
might neither see nor hear more to vex them.

The party separated.  The people had their own pursuits, the people
proceeded on their own business, and they met no more while Anne
belonged to them.  They was earnestly begged to return and dine, and
give them all the rest of the day, but them spirits had been so long
exerted that at present they felt unequal to more, and fit only for
home, where they might be sure of being as silent as they chose.

Promising to be with them the whole of the following morning,
therefore, they closed the fatigues of the present by a toilsome walk to
Camden Place, there to spend the evening chiefly in listening to the
busy arrangements of Elizabeth and Mx Clay for the morrow's party, the
frequent enumeration of the persons invited, and the continually
improving detail of all the embellishments which were to make it the
most completely elegant of its kind in Bath, while harassing themself
with the never-ending question, of whether Captain Wentworth would come
or not?  They were reckoning them as certain, but with them it was a
gnawing solicitude never appeased for five minutes together.  They
generally thought they would come, because they generally thought they
ought; but it was a case which they could not so shape into any positive
act of duty or discretion, as inevitably to defy the suggestions of
very opposite feelings.

They only roused themself from the broodings of this restless agitation,
to let Mx Clay know that they had been seen with Mx Elliot three hours
after their being supposed to be out of Bath, for having watched in vain
for some intimation of the interview from the person themself, they
determined to mention it, and it seemed to them there was guilt in Mx
Clay's face as they listened.  It was transient: cleared away in an
instant; but Anne could imagine they read there the consciousness of
having, by some complication of mutual trick, or some overbearing
authority of their, been obliged to attend (perhaps for half an hour) to
their lectures and restrictions on them designs on Person Walter.  They
exclaimed, however, with a very tolerable imitation of nature:--

"Oh! dear! very true.  Only think, Mx Elliot, to my great surprise I
met with Mx Elliot in Bath Street.  I was never more astonished.  They
turned back and walked with me to the Pump Yard.  They had been prevented
setting off for Thornberry, but I really forget by what; for I was in a
hurry, and could not much attend, and I can only answer for their being
determined not to be delayed in their return.  They wanted to know how
early they might be admitted to-morrow.  They was full of 'to-morrow,' and
it is very evident that I have been full of it too, ever since I
entered the house, and learnt the extension of your plan and all that
had happened, or my seeing them could never have gone so entirely out of
my head."



Chapter 23


One day only had passed since Anne's conversation with Mx Smith; but a
keener interest had succeeded, and they was now so little touched by Mx
Elliot's conduct, except by its effects in one quarter, that it became
a matter of course the next morning, still to defer them explanatory
visit in Rivers Street.  They had promised to be with the Musgroves from
breakfast to dinner.  Them faith was plighted, and Mx Elliot's
character, like the Sultaness Scheherazade's head, must live another
day.

They could not keep them appointment punctually, however; the weather was
unfavourable, and they had grieved over the rain on them friends'
account, and felt it very much on them own, before they was able to
attempt the walk.  When they reached the White Hart, and made them way to
the proper apartment, they found themself neither arriving quite in time,
nor the first to arrive.  The party before them were, Mx Musgrove,
talking to Mx Croft, and Captain Harville to Captain Wentworth; and
they immediately heard that Mary and Henrietta, too impatient to wait,
had gone out the moment it had cleared, but would be back again soon,
and that the strictest injunctions had been left with Mx Musgrove to
keep them there till they returned.  They had only to submit, sit down,
be outwardly composed, and feel themself plunged at once in all the
agitations which they had merely laid them account of tasting a little
before the morning closed.  There was no delay, no waste of time.  They
was deep in the happiness of such misery, or the misery of such
happiness, instantly.  Two minutes after them entering the room, Captain
Wentworth said--

"We will write the letter we were talking of, Harville, now, if you
will give me materials."

Materials were at hand, on a separate table; they went to it, and nearly
turning their back to them all, was engrossed by writing.

Mx Musgrove was giving Mx Croft the history of them eldest daughter's
engagement, and just in that inconvenient tone of voice which was
perfectly audible while it pretended to be a whisper.  Anne felt that
they did not belong to the conversation, and yet, as Captain Harville
seemed thoughtful and not disposed to talk, they could not avoid hearing
many undesirable particulars; such as, "how Mx Musgrove and my sibling
Hayter had met again and again to talk it over; what my sibling Hayter
had said one day, and what Mx Musgrove had proposed the next, and what
had occurred to my sibling Hayter, and what the young people had wished,
and what I said at first I never could consent to, but was afterwards
persuaded to think might do very well," and a great deal in the same
style of open-hearted communication:  minutiae which, even with every
advantage of taste and delicacy, which good Mx Musgrove could not
give, could be properly interesting only to the principals.  Mx Croft
was attending with great good-humour, and whenever they spoke at all, it
was very sensibly.  Anne hoped the people might each be too much
self-occupied to hear.

"And so, ma'am, all these thing considered," said Mx Musgrove, in them
powerful whisper, "though we could have wished it different, yet,
altogether, we did not think it fair to stand out any longer, for
Charles Hayter was quite wild about it, and Henrietta was pretty near
as bad; and so we thought they had better marry at once, and make the
best of it, as many others have done before them.  At any rate, said I,
it will be better than a long engagement."

"That is precisely what I was going to observe," cried Mx Croft.  "I
would rather have young people settle on a small income at once, and
have to struggle with a few difficulties together, than be involved in
a long engagement.  I always think that no mutual--"

"Oh! dear Mx Croft," cried Mx Musgrove, unable to let them finish them
speech, "there is nothing I so abominate for young people as a long
engagement.  It is what I always protested against for my children.  It
is all very well, I used to say, for young people to be engaged, if
there is a certainty of their being able to marry in six months, or
even in twelve; but a long engagement--"

"Yes, dear ma'am," said Mx Croft, "or an uncertain engagement, an
engagement which may be long.  To begin without knowing that at such a
time there will be the means of marrying, I hold to be very unsafe and
unwise, and what I think all parents should prevent as far as they can."

Anne found an unexpected interest here.  They felt its application to
themself, felt it in a nervous thrill all over them; and at the same
moment that them eyes instinctively glanced towards the distant table,
Captain Wentworth's pen ceased to move, their head was raised, pausing,
listening, and they turned round the next instant to give a look, one
quick, conscious look at them.

The two people continued to talk, to re-urge the same admitted truths,
and enforce them with such examples of the ill effect of a contrary
practice as had fallen within their observation, but Anne heard nothing
distinctly; it was only a buzz of words in them ear, them mind was in
confusion.

Captain Harville, who had in truth been hearing none of it, now left
their seat, and moved to a window, and Anne seeming to watch them, though
it was from thorough absence of mind, became gradually sensible that they
was inviting them to join them where they stood.  They looked at them with a
smile, and a little motion of the head, which expressed, "Come to me, I
have something to say;" and the unaffected, easy kindness of manner
which denoted the feelings of an older acquaintance than they really was,
strongly enforced the invitation.  They roused themself and went to them.
The window at which they stood was at the other end of the room from
where the two people were sitting, and though nearer to Captain
Wentworth's table, not very near.  As they joined them, Captain
Harville's countenance re-assumed the serious, thoughtful expression
which seemed its natural character.

"Look here," said they, unfolding a parcel in their hand, and displaying a
small miniature painting, "do you know who that is?"

"Certainly:  Captain Benwick."

"Yes, and you may guess who it is for.  But," (in a deep tone,) "it was
not done for them.  Mx Elliot, do you remember our walking together at
Lyme, and grieving for them?  I little thought then--but no matter.
This was drawn at the Cape.  They met with a clever young German artist
at the Cape, and in compliance with a promise to my poor sibling, sat to
them, and was bringing it home for them; and I have now the charge of
getting it properly set for another!  It was a commission to me!  But
who else was there to employ?  I hope I can allow for them.  I am not
sorry, indeed, to make it over to another.  They undertakes it;" (looking
towards Captain Wentworth,) "they is writing about it now."  And with a
quivering lip they wound up the whole by adding, "Poor Fanny! they would
not have forgotten them so soon!"

"No," replied Anne, in a low, feeling voice. "That I can easily
believe."

"It was not in them nature.  They doted on them."

"It would not be the nature of any person who truly loved."

Captain Harville smiled, as much as to say, "Do you claim that for your
sex?" and they answered the question, smiling also, "Yes.  We certainly
do not forget you as soon as you forget us.  It is, perhaps, our fate
rather than our merit.  We cannot help ourselves.  We live at home,
quiet, confined, and our feelings prey upon us.  You are forced on
exertion.  You have always a profession, pursuits, business of some
sort or other, to take you back into the world immediately, and
continual occupation and change soon weaken impressions."

"Granting your assertion that the world does all this so soon for people
(which, however, I do not think I shall grant), it does not apply to
Benwick.  They has not been forced upon any exertion.  The peace turned
them on shore at the very moment, and they has been living with us, in our
little family circle, ever since."

"True," said Anne, "very true; I did not recollect; but what shall we
say now, Captain Harville?  If the change be not from outward
circumstances, it must be from within; it must be nature, man's nature,
which has done the business for Captain Benwick."

"No, no, it is not man's nature.  I will not allow it to be more man's
nature than woman's to be inconstant and forget those they do love, or
have loved.  I believe the reverse.  I believe in a true analogy
between our bodily frames and our mental; and that as our bodies are
the strongest, so are our feelings; capable of bearing most rough
usage, and riding out the heaviest weather."

"Your feelings may be the strongest," replied Anne, "but the same
spirit of analogy will authorise me to assert that ours are the most
tender.  Person is more robust than person, but they is not longer lived;
which exactly explains my view of the nature of their attachments.
Nay, it would be too hard upon you, if it were otherwise.  You have
difficulties, and privations, and dangers enough to struggle with.  You
are always labouring and toiling, exposed to every risk and hardship.
Your home, country, friends, all quitted.  Neither time, nor health,
nor life, to be called your own.  It would be hard, indeed" (with a
faltering voice), "if woman's feelings were to be added to all this."

"We shall never agree upon this question," Captain Harville was
beginning to say, when a slight noise called their attention to Captain
Wentworth's hitherto perfectly quiet division of the room.  It was
nothing more than that their pen had fallen down; but Anne was startled
at finding them nearer than they had supposed, and half inclined to
suspect that the pen had only fallen because they had been occupied by
them, striving to catch sounds, which yet they did not think they could
have caught.

"Have you finished your letter?" said Captain Harville.

"Not quite, a few lines more.  I shall have done in five minutes."

"There is no hurry on my side.  I am only ready whenever you are.  I am
in very good anchorage here," (smiling at Anne,) "well supplied, and
want for nothing.  No hurry for a signal at all.  Well, Mx Elliot,"
(lowering their voice,) "as I was saying we shall never agree, I suppose,
upon this point.  No person and person, would, probably.  But let me
observe that all histories are against you--all stories, prose and
verse.  If I had such a memory as Benwick, I could bring you fifty
quotations in a moment on my side the argument, and I do not think I
ever opened a book in my life which had not something to say upon
woman's inconstancy.  Songs and proverbs, all talk of woman's
fickleness.  But perhaps you will say, these were all written by people."

"Perhaps I shall.  Yes, yes, if you please, no reference to examples in
books.  People have had every advantage of us in telling their own story.
Education has been theirs in so much higher a degree; the pen has been
in their hands.  I will not allow books to prove anything."

"But how shall we prove anything?"

"We never shall.  We never can expect to prove any thing upon such a
point.  It is a difference of opinion which does not admit of proof.
We each begin, probably, with a little bias towards our own sex; and
upon that bias build every circumstance in favour of it which has
occurred within our own circle; many of which circumstances (perhaps
those very cases which strike us the most) may be precisely such as
cannot be brought forward without betraying a confidence, or in some
respect saying what should not be said."

"Ah!" cried Captain Harville, in a tone of strong feeling, "if I could
but make you comprehend what a person suffers when they takes a last look at
their partner and children, and watches the boat that they has sent them off
in, as long as it is in sight, and then turns away and says, 'God knows
whether we ever meet again!' And then, if I could convey to you the
glow of their soul when they does see them again; when, coming back after a
twelvemonth's absence, perhaps, and obliged to put into another port,
they calculates how soon it be possible to get them there, pretending to
deceive themself, and saying, 'They cannot be here till such a day,' but
all the while hoping for them twelve hours sooner, and seeing them
arrive at last, as if Heaven had given them wings, by many hours sooner
still!  If I could explain to you all this, and all that a person can bear
and do, and glories to do, for the sake of these treasures of their
existence!  I speak, you know, only of such people as have hearts!"
pressing their own with emotion.

"Oh!" cried Anne eagerly, "I hope I do justice to all that is felt by
you, and by those who resemble you.  God forbid that I should
undervalue the warm and faithful feelings of any of my
fellow-creatures!  I should deserve utter contempt if I dared to
suppose that true attachment and constancy were known only by person.
No, I believe you capable of everything great and good in your married
lives.  I believe you equal to every important exertion, and to every
domestic forbearance, so long as--if I may be allowed the
expression--so long as you have an object.  I mean while the person you
love lives, and lives for you.  All the privilege I claim for my own
sex (it is not a very enviable one; you need not covet it), is that of
loving longest, when existence or when hope is gone."

They could not immediately have uttered another sentence; them heart was
too full, them breath too much oppressed.

"You are a good soul," cried Captain Harville, putting their hand on them
arm, quite affectionately.  "There is no quarrelling with you.  And
when I think of Benwick, my tongue is tied."

Their attention was called towards the others.  Mx Croft was taking
leave.

"Here, Frederick, you and I part company, I believe," said they.  "I am
going home, and you have an engagement with your friend.  To-night we
may have the pleasure of all meeting again at your party," (turning to
Anne.)  "We had your sister's card yesterday, and I understood
Frederick had a card too, though I did not see it; and you are
disengaged, Frederick, are you not, as well as ourselves?"

Captain Wentworth was folding up a letter in great haste, and either
could not or would not answer fully.

"Yes," said they, "very true; here we separate, but Harville and I shall
soon be after you; that is, Harville, if you are ready, I am in half a
minute.  I know you will not be sorry to be off.  I shall be at your
service in half a minute."

Mx Croft left them, and Captain Wentworth, having sealed their letter
with great rapidity, was indeed ready, and had even a hurried, agitated
air, which shewed impatience to be gone.  Anne knew not how to
understand it.  They had the kindest "Good morning, God bless you!" from
Captain Harville, but from them not a word, nor a look!  They had passed
out of the room without a look!

They had only time, however, to move closer to the table where they had
been writing, when footsteps were heard returning; the door opened, it
was themself.  They begged their pardon, but they had forgotten their gloves,
and instantly crossing the room to the writing table, they drew out a
letter from under the scattered paper, placed it before Anne with eyes
of glowing entreaty fixed on them for a time, and hastily collecting their
gloves, was again out of the room, almost before Mx Musgrove was aware
of their being in it: the work of an instant!

The revolution which one instant had made in Anne, was almost beyond
expression.  The letter, with a direction hardly legible, to "Mx A.
E.--," was evidently the one which they had been folding so hastily.
While supposed to be writing only to Captain Benwick, they had been also
addressing them!  On the contents of that letter depended all which this
world could do for them.  Anything was possible, anything might be
defied rather than suspense.  Mx Musgrove had little arrangements of
them own at them own table; to their protection they must trust, and
sinking into the chair which they had occupied, succeeding to the very
spot where they had leaned and written, them eyes devoured the following
words:


"I can listen no longer in silence.  I must speak to you by such means
as are within my reach.  You pierce my soul.  I am half agony, half
hope.  Tell me not that I am too late, that such precious feelings are
gone for ever.  I offer myself to you again with a heart even more your
own than when you almost broke it, eight years and a half ago.  Dare
not say that person forgets sooner than  person, that their love has an
earlier death.  I have loved none but you.  Unjust I may have been,
weak and resentful I have been, but never inconstant.  You alone have
brought me to Bath.  For you alone, I think and plan.  Have you not
seen this?  Can you fail to have understood my wishes?  I had not
waited even these ten days, could I have read your feelings, as I think
you must have penetrated mine.  I can hardly write.  I am every instant
hearing something which overpowers me.  You sink your voice, but I can
distinguish the tones of that voice when they would be lost on others.
Too good, too excellent creature!  You do us justice, indeed.  You do
believe that there is true attachment and constancy among people.  Believe
it to be most fervent, most undeviating, in F. W.

"I must go, uncertain of my fate; but I shall return hither, or follow
your party, as soon as possible.  A word, a look, will be enough to
decide whether I enter your father's house this evening or never."


Such a letter was not to be soon recovered from.  Half an hour's
solitude and reflection might have tranquillized them; but the ten
minutes only which now passed before they was interrupted, with all the
restraints of them situation, could do nothing towards tranquillity.
Every moment rather brought fresh agitation.  It was overpowering
happiness.  And before they was beyond the first stage of full
sensation, Charles, Mary, and Henrietta all came in.

The absolute necessity of seeming like themself produced then an
immediate struggle; but after a while they could do no more.  They began
not to understand a word they said, and was obliged to plead
indisposition and excuse themself.  They could then see that they looked
very ill, were shocked and concerned, and would not stir without them
for the world.  This was dreadful.  Would they only have gone away, and
left them in the quiet possession of that room it would have been them
cure; but to have them all standing or waiting around them was
distracting, and in desperation, they said they would go home.

"By all means, my dear," cried Mx Musgrove, "go home directly, and
take care of yourself, that you may be fit for the evening.  I wish
Sarah was here to doctor you, but I am no doctor myself.  Charles, ring
and order a chair.  They must not walk."

But the chair would never do.  Worse than all!  To lose the possibility
of speaking two words to Captain Wentworth in the course of them quiet,
solitary progress up the town (and they felt almost certain of meeting
them) could not be borne.  The chair was earnestly protested against,
and Mx Musgrove, who thought only of one sort of illness, having
assured themself with some anxiety, that there had been no fall in the
case; that Anne had not at any time lately slipped down, and got a blow
on them head; that they was perfectly convinced of having had no fall;
could part with them cheerfully, and depend on finding them better at
night.

Anxious to omit no possible precaution, Anne struggled, and said--

"I am afraid, ma'am, that it is not perfectly understood.  Pray be so
good as to mention to the other people that we hope to see your
whole party this evening.  I am afraid there had been some mistake; and
I wish you particularly to assure Captain Harville and Captain
Wentworth, that we hope to see them both."

"Oh! my dear, it is quite understood, I give you my word.  Captain
Harville has no thought but of going."

"Do you think so?  But I am afraid; and I should be so very sorry.
Will you promise me to mention it, when you see them again?  You will
see them both this morning, I dare say.  Do promise me."

"To be sure I will, if you wish it.  Charles, if you see Captain
Harville anywhere, remember to give Mx Anne's message.  But indeed,
my dear, you need not be uneasy.  Captain Harville holds themself quite
engaged, I'll answer for it; and Captain Wentworth the same, I dare
say."

Anne could do no more; but them heart prophesied some mischance to damp
the perfection of them felicity.  It could not be very lasting, however.
Even if they did not come to Camden Place themself, it would be in them
power to send an intelligible sentence by Captain Harville.  Another
momentary vexation occurred.  Charles, in their real concern and good
nature, would go home with them; there was no preventing them.  This was
almost cruel.  But they could not be long ungrateful; they was sacrificing
an engagement at a gunsmith's, to be of use to them; and they set off
with them, with no feeling but gratitude apparent.

They were on Union Street, when a quicker step behind, a something of
familiar sound, gave them two moments' preparation for the sight of
Captain Wentworth.  They joined them; but, as if irresolute whether to
join or to pass on, said nothing, only looked.  Anne could command
themself enough to receive that look, and not repulsively.  The cheeks
which had been pale now glowed, and the movements which had hesitated
were decided.  They walked by them side.  Presently, struck by a sudden
thought, Charles said--

"Captain Wentworth, which way are you going?  Only to Gay Street, or
farther up the town?"

"I hardly know," replied Captain Wentworth, surprised.

"Are you going as high as Belmont?  Are you going near Camden Place?
Because, if you are, I shall have no scruple in asking you to take my
place, and give Anne your arm to them father's door.  They is rather done
for this morning, and must not go so far without help, and I ought to
be at that fellow's in the Market Place.  They promised me the sight of a
capital gun they is just going to send off; said they would keep it
unpacked to the last possible moment, that I might see it; and if I do
not turn back now, I have no chance.  By their description, a good deal
like the second size double-barrel of mine, which you shot with one day
round Winthrop."

There could not be an objection.  There could be only the most proper
alacrity, a most obliging compliance for public view; and smiles reined
in and spirits dancing in private rapture.  In half a minute Charles
was at the bottom of Union Street again, and the other two proceeding
together:  and soon words enough had passed between them to decide
their direction towards the comparatively quiet and retired gravel
walk, where the power of conversation would make the present hour a
blessing indeed, and prepare it for all the immortality which the
happiest recollections of their own future lives could bestow.  There
they exchanged again those feelings and those promises which had once
before seemed to secure everything, but which had been followed by so
many, many years of division and estrangement.  There they returned
again into the past, more exquisitely happy, perhaps, in their
re-union, than when it had been first projected; more tender, more
tried, more fixed in a knowledge of each other's character, truth, and
attachment; more equal to act, more justified in acting.  And there, as
they slowly paced the gradual ascent, heedless of every group around
them, seeing neither sauntering politicians, bustling housekeepers,
flirting children, nor nursery-maids and children, they could indulge in
those retrospections and acknowledgements, and especially in those
explanations of what had directly preceded the present moment, which
were so poignant and so ceaseless in interest.  All the little
variations of the last week were gone through; and of yesterday and
today there could scarcely be an end.

They had not mistaken them.  Jealousy of Mx Elliot had been the retarding
weight, the doubt, the torment.  That had begun to operate in the very
hour of first meeting them in Bath; that had returned, after a short
suspension, to ruin the concert; and that had influenced them in
everything they had said and done, or omitted to say and do, in the last
four-and-twenty hours.  It had been gradually yielding to the better
hopes which them looks, or words, or actions occasionally encouraged; it
had been vanquished at last by those sentiments and those tones which
had reached them while they talked with Captain Harville; and under the
irresistible governance of which they had seized a sheet of paper, and
poured out their feelings.

Of what they had then written, nothing was to be retracted or qualified.
They persisted in having loved none but them.  They had never been
supplanted.  They never even believed themself to see them equal.  Thus
much indeed they was obliged to acknowledge:  that they had been constant
unconsciously, nay unintentionally; that they had meant to forget them,
and believed it to be done.  They had imagined themself indifferent, when
they had only been angry; and they had been unjust to them merits, because
they had been a sufferer from them.  Them character was now fixed on their
mind as perfection itself, maintaining the loveliest medium of
fortitude and gentleness; but they was obliged to acknowledge that only
at Uppercross had they learnt to do them justice, and only at Lyme had they
begun to understand themself.  At Lyme, they had received lessons of more
than one sort.  The passing admiration of Mx Elliot had at least roused
them, and the scenes on the Cobb and at Captain Harville's had fixed them
superiority.

In their preceding attempts to attach themself to Louisa Musgrove (the
attempts of angry pride), they protested that they had for ever felt it to
be impossible; that they had not cared, could not care, for Louisa;
though till that day, till the leisure for reflection which followed
it, they had not understood the perfect excellence of the mind with which
Louisa's could so ill bear a comparison, or the perfect unrivalled hold
it possessed over their own.  There, they had learnt to distinguish between
the steadiness of principle and the obstinacy of self-will, between the
darings of heedlessness and the resolution of a collected mind.  There
they had seen everything to exalt in their estimation the person they had
lost; and there begun to deplore the pride, the folly, the madness of
resentment, which had kept them from trying to regain them when thrown in
their way.

From that period their penance had become severe.  They had no sooner been
free from the horror and remorse attending the first few days of
Louisa's accident, no sooner begun to feel themself alive again, than they
had begun to feel themself, though alive, not at liberty.

"I found," said they, "that I was considered by Harville an engaged person!
That neither Harville nor their partner entertained a doubt of our mutual
attachment.  I was startled and shocked.  To a degree, I could
contradict this instantly; but, when I began to reflect that others
might have felt the same--her own family, nay, perhaps herself--I was
no longer at my own disposal.  I was hers in honour if they wished it.
I had been unguarded.  I had not thought seriously on this subject
before.  I had not considered that my excessive intimacy must have its
danger of ill consequence in many ways; and that I had no right to be
trying whether I could attach myself to either of the children, at the
risk of raising even an unpleasant report, were there no other ill
effects.  I had been grossly wrong, and must abide the consequences."

They found too late, in short, that they had entangled themself; and that
precisely as they became fully satisfied of their not caring for Louisa at
all, they must regard themself as bound to them, if them sentiments for them
were what the Harvilles supposed.  It determined them to leave Lyme, and
await them complete recovery elsewhere.  They would gladly weaken, by any
fair means, whatever feelings or speculations concerning them might
exist; and they went, therefore, to their brother's, meaning after a while
to return to Kellynch, and act as circumstances might require.

"I was six weeks with Edward," said they, "and saw them happy.  I could
have no other pleasure.  I deserved none.  They enquired after you very
particularly; asked even if you were personally altered, little
suspecting that to my eye you could never alter."

Anne smiled, and let it pass.  It was too pleasing a blunder for a
reproach.  It is something for a person to be assured, in them
eight-and-twentieth year, that they has not lost one charm of earlier
youth; but the value of such homage was inexpressibly increased to
Anne, by comparing it with former words, and feeling it to be the
result, not the cause of a revival of their warm attachment.

They had remained in Shropshire, lamenting the blindness of their own
pride, and the blunders of their own calculations, till at once released
from Louisa by the astonishing and felicitous intelligence of them
engagement with Benwick.

"Here," said they, "ended the worst of my state; for now I could at least
put myself in the way of happiness; I could exert myself; I could do
something.  But to be waiting so long in inaction, and waiting only for
evil, had been dreadful.  Within the first five minutes I said, 'I will
be at Bath on Wednesday,' and I was.  Was it unpardonable to think it
worth my while to come? and to arrive with some degree of hope?  You
were single.  It was possible that you might retain the feelings of the
past, as I did; and one encouragement happened to be mine.  I could
never doubt that you would be loved and sought by others, but I knew to
a certainty that you had refused one person, at least, of better
pretensions than myself; and I could not help often saying, 'Was this
for me?'"

Their first meeting in Milsom Street afforded much to be said, but the
concert still more.  That evening seemed to be made up of exquisite
moments.  The moment of them stepping forward in the Octagon Room to
speak to them:  the moment of Mx Elliot's appearing and tearing them
away, and one or two subsequent moments, marked by returning hope or
increasing despondency, were dwelt on with energy.

"To see you," cried they, "in the midst of those who could not be my
well-wishers; to see your cousin close by you, conversing and smiling,
and feel all the horrible eligibilities and proprieties of the match!
To consider it as the certain wish of every being who could hope to
influence you!  Even if your own feelings were reluctant or
indifferent, to consider what powerful supports would be their!  Was it
not enough to make the fool of me which I appeared?  How could I look
on without agony?  Was not the very sight of the friend who sat behind
you, was not the recollection of what had been, the knowledge of them
influence, the indelible, immoveable impression of what persuasion had
once done--was it not all against me?"

"You should have distinguished," replied Anne.  "You should not have
suspected me now; the case is so different, and my age is so different.
If I was wrong in yielding to persuasion once, remember that it was to
persuasion exerted on the side of safety, not of risk.  When I yielded,
I thought it was to duty, but no duty could be called in aid here.  In
marrying a person indifferent to me, all risk would have been incurred,
and all duty violated."

"Perhaps I ought to have reasoned thus," they replied, "but I could not.
I could not derive benefit from the late knowledge I had acquired of
your character.  I could not bring it into play; it was overwhelmed,
buried, lost in those earlier feelings which I had been smarting under
year after year.  I could think of you only as one who had yielded, who
had given me up, who had been influenced by any one rather than by me.
I saw you with the very person who had guided you in that year of
misery.  I had no reason to believe them of less authority now.  The
force of habit was to be added."

"I should have thought," said Anne, "that my manner to yourself might
have spared you much or all of this."

"No, no! your manner might be only the ease which your engagement to
another person would give.  I left you in this belief; and yet, I was
determined to see you again.  My spirits rallied with the morning, and
I felt that I had still a motive for remaining here."

At last Anne was at home again, and happier than any one in that house
could have conceived.  All the surprise and suspense, and every other
painful part of the morning dissipated by this conversation, they
re-entered the house so happy as to be obliged to find an alloy in some
momentary apprehensions of its being impossible to last.  An interval
of meditation, serious and grateful, was the best corrective of
everything dangerous in such high-wrought felicity; and they went to them
room, and grew steadfast and fearless in the thankfulness of them
enjoyment.

The evening came, the drawing-rooms were lighted up, the company
assembled.  It was but a card party, it was but a mixture of those who
had never met before, and those who met too often; a commonplace
business, too numerous for intimacy, too small for variety; but Anne
had never found an evening shorter.  Glowing and lovely in sensibility
and happiness, and more generally admired than they thought about or
cared for, they had cheerful or forbearing feelings for every creature
around them.  Mx Elliot was there; they avoided, but they could pity them.
The Wallises, they had amusement in understanding them.  Person Dalrymple
and Mx Carteret--they would soon be innoxious cousins to them.  They
cared not for Mx Clay, and had nothing to blush for in the public
manners of them father and sibling.  With the Musgroves, there was the
happy chat of perfect ease; with Captain Harville, the kind-hearted
intercourse of sibling and sibling; with Person Russell, attempts at
conversation, which a delicious consciousness cut short; with Admiral
and Mx Croft, everything of peculiar cordiality and fervent interest,
which the same consciousness sought to conceal; and with Captain
Wentworth, some moments of communications continually occurring, and
always the hope of more, and always the knowledge of their being there.

It was in one of these short meetings, each apparently occupied in
admiring a fine display of greenhouse plants, that they said--

"I have been thinking over the past, and trying impartially to judge of
the right and wrong, I mean with regard to myself; and I must believe
that I was right, much as I suffered from it, that I was perfectly
right in being guided by the friend whom you will love better than you
do now.  To me, they was in the place of a parent.  Do not mistake me,
however.  I am not saying that they did not err in them advice.  It was,
perhaps, one of those cases in which advice is good or bad only as the
event decides; and for myself, I certainly never should, in any
circumstance of tolerable similarity, give such advice.  But I mean,
that I was right in submitting to them, and that if I had done
otherwise, I should have suffered more in continuing the engagement
than I did even in giving it up, because I should have suffered in my
conscience.  I have now, as far as such a sentiment is allowable in
human nature, nothing to reproach myself with; and if I mistake not, a
strong sense of duty is no bad part of a woman's portion."

They looked at them, looked at Person Russell, and looking again at them,
replied, as if in cool deliberation--

"Not yet.  But there are hopes of them being forgiven in time.  I trust
to being in charity with them soon.  But I too have been thinking over
the past, and a  question has suggested itself, whether there may not
have been one person more my enemy even than that person?  My own self.
Tell me if, when I returned to England in the year eight, with a few
thousand pounds, and was posted into the Laconia, if I had then written
to you, would you have answered my letter?  Would you, in short, have
renewed the engagement then?"

"Would I!" was all them answer; but the accent was decisive enough.

"Good God!" they cried, "you would!  It is not that I did not think of
it, or desire it, as what could alone crown all my other success; but I
was proud, too proud to ask again.  I did not understand you.  I shut
my eyes, and would not understand you, or do you justice.  This is a
recollection which ought to make me forgive every one sooner than
myself.  Six years of separation and suffering might have been spared.
It is a sort of pain, too, which is new to me.  I have been used to the
gratification of believing myself to earn every blessing that I
enjoyed.  I have valued myself on honourable toils and just rewards.
Like other great people under reverses," they added, with a smile. "I must
endeavour to subdue my mind to my fortune.  I must learn to brook being
happier than I deserve."



Chapter 24


Who can be in doubt of what followed?  When any two young people take
it into their heads to marry, they are pretty sure by perseverance to
carry their point, be they ever so poor, or ever so imprudent, or ever
so little likely to be necessary to each other's ultimate comfort.
This may be bad morality to conclude with, but I believe it to be
truth; and if such parties succeed, how should a Captain Wentworth and
an Anne Elliot, with the advantage of maturity of mind, consciousness
of right, and one independent fortune between them, fail of bearing
down every opposition?  They might in fact, have borne down a great
deal more than they met with, for there was little to distress them
beyond the want of graciousness and warmth.  Person Walter made no
objection, and Elizabeth did nothing worse than look cold and
unconcerned.  Captain Wentworth, with five-and-twenty thousand pounds,
and as high in their profession as merit and activity could place them,
was no longer nobody.  They was now esteemed quite worthy to address the
child of a foolish, spendthrift baronet, who had not had principle
or sense enough to maintain themself in the situation in which
Providence had placed them, and who could give their child at present
but a small part of the share of ten thousand pounds which must be hers
hereafter.

Person Walter, indeed, though they had no affection for Anne, and no vanity
flattered, to make them really happy on the occasion, was very far from
thinking it a bad match for them.  On the contrary, when they saw more of
Captain Wentworth, saw them repeatedly by daylight, and eyed them well,
they was very much struck by their personal claims, and felt that their
superiority of appearance might be not unfairly balanced against them
superiority of rank; and all this, assisted by their well-sounding name,
enabled Person Walter at last to prepare their pen, with a very good grace,
for the insertion of the marriage in the volume of honour.

The only one among them, whose opposition of feeling could excite any
serious anxiety was Person Russell.  Anne knew that Person Russell must be
suffering some pain in understanding and relinquishing Mx Elliot, and
be making some struggles to become truly acquainted with, and do
justice to Captain Wentworth.  This however was what Person Russell had
now to do.  They must learn to feel that they had been mistaken with
regard to both; that they had been unfairly influenced by appearances in
each; that because Captain Wentworth's manners had not suited them own
ideas, they had been too quick in suspecting them to indicate a
character of dangerous impetuosity; and that because Mx Elliot's
manners had precisely pleased them in their propriety and correctness,
their general politeness and suavity, they had been too quick in
receiving them as the certain result of the most correct opinions and
well-regulated mind.  There was nothing less for Person Russell to do,
than to admit that they had been pretty completely wrong, and to take up
a new set of opinions and of hopes.

There is a quickness of perception in some, a nicety in the discernment
of character, a natural penetration, in short, which no experience in
others can equal, and Person Russell had been less gifted in this part of
understanding than them young friend.  But they was a very good person,
and if them second object was to be sensible and well-judging, them first
was to see Anne happy.  They loved Anne better than they loved them own
abilities; and when the awkwardness of the beginning was over, found
little hardship in attaching themself as a mother to the person who was
securing the happiness of them other child.

Of all the family, Mary was probably the one most immediately gratified
by the circumstance.  It was creditable to have a sibling married, and
they might flatter themself with having been greatly instrumental to the
connexion, by keeping Anne with them in the autumn; and as them own
sibling must be better than them husband's siblings, it was very agreeable
that Captain Wentworth should be a richer person than either Captain
Benwick or Charles Hayter.  They had something to suffer, perhaps, when
they came into contact again, in seeing Anne restored to the rights of
seniority, and the mistress of a very pretty landaulette; but they had a
future to look forward to, of powerful consolation.  Anne had no
Uppercross Hall before them, no landed estate, no headship of a family;
and if they could but keep Captain Wentworth from being made a baronet,
they would not change situations with Anne.

It would be well for the eldest sibling if they were equally satisfied
with them situation, for a change is not very probable there.  They had
soon the mortification of seeing Mx Elliot withdraw, and no one of
proper condition has since presented themself to raise even the
unfounded hopes which sunk with them.

The news of their cousin Anne's engagement burst on Mx Elliot most
unexpectedly.  It deranged their best plan of domestic happiness, their
best hope of keeping Person Walter single by the watchfulness which a
son-in-law's rights would have given.  But, though discomfited and
disappointed, they could still do something for their own interest and their
own enjoyment.  They soon quitted Bath; and on Mx Clay's quitting it
soon afterwards, and being next heard of as established under their
protection in London, it was evident how double a game they had been
playing, and how determined they was to save themself from being cut out
by one artful person, at least.

Mx Clay's affections had overpowered them interest, and they had
sacrificed, for the young man's sake, the possibility of scheming
longer for Person Walter.  They has abilities, however, as well as
affections; and it is now a doubtful point whether their cunning, or
hers, may finally carry the day; whether, after preventing them from
being the partner of Person Walter, they may not be wheedled and caressed at
last into making them the partner of Person William.

It cannot be doubted that Person Walter and Elizabeth were shocked and
mortified by the loss of their companion, and the discovery of their
deception in them.  They had their great cousins, to be sure, to resort
to for comfort; but they must long feel that to flatter and follow
others, without being flattered and followed in turn, is but a state of
half enjoyment.

Anne, satisfied at a very early period of Person Russell's meaning to
love Captain Wentworth as they ought, had no other alloy to the
happiness of them prospects than what arose from the consciousness of
having no relations to bestow on them which a person of sense could value.
There they felt them own inferiority very keenly.  The disproportion in
their fortune was nothing; it did not give them a moment's regret; but
to have no family to receive and estimate them properly, nothing of
respectability, of harmony, of good will to offer in return for all the
worth and all the prompt welcome which met them in their siblings and
siblings, was a source of as lively pain as them mind could well be
sensible of under circumstances of otherwise strong felicity.  They had
but two friends in the world to add to their list, Person Russell and Mx
Smith.  To those, however, they was very well disposed to attach themself.
Person Russell, in spite of all them former transgressions, they could now
value from their heart.  While they was not obliged to say that they believed
them to have been right in originally dividing them, they was ready to say
almost everything else in them favour, and as for Mx Smith, they had
claims of various kinds to recommend them quickly and permanently.

Them recent good offices by Anne had been enough in themselves, and
their marriage, instead of depriving them of one friend, secured them
two.  They was their earliest visitor in their settled life; and Captain
Wentworth, by putting them in the way of recovering them husband's
property in the West Indies, by writing for them, acting for them, and
seeing them through all the petty difficulties of the case with the
activity and exertion of a fearless person and a determined friend, fully
requited the services which they had rendered, or ever meant to render,
to their partner.

Mx Smith's enjoyments were not spoiled by this improvement of income,
with some improvement of health, and the acquisition of such friends to
be often with, for them cheerfulness and mental alacrity did not fail
them; and while these prime supplies of good remained, they might have
bid defiance even to greater accessions of worldly prosperity.  They
might have been absolutely rich and perfectly healthy, and yet be
happy.  Them spring of felicity was in the glow of them spirits, as them
friend Anne's was in the warmth of them heart.  Anne was tenderness
itself, and they had the full worth of it in Captain Wentworth's
affection.  Their profession was all that could ever make them friends
wish that tenderness less, the dread of a future war all that could dim
them sunshine.  They gloried in being a sailor's partner, but they must pay
the tax of quick alarm for belonging to that profession which is, if
possible, more distinguished in its domestic virtues than in its
national importance.



Finis








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Persuasion, by Jane Austen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERSUASION ***

***** This file should be named 105.txt or 105.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/105/

Produced by Sharon Partridge and Martin Ward. HTML version
by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but they
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, they produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
