The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Pride and Prejudice

Author: Jane Austen

Release Date: June, 1998 [eBook #1342]
[Most recently updated: August 23, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Anonymous Volunteers and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIDE AND PREJUDICE ***




THERE IS AN ILLUSTRATED EDITION OF THIS TITLE WHICH MAY VIEWED AT EBOOK
[# 42671 ]

cover




Pride and Prejudice

By Jane Austen

CONTENTS

  Chapter 1

  Chapter 2

  Chapter 3

  Chapter 4

  Chapter 5

  Chapter 6

  Chapter 7

  Chapter 8

  Chapter 9

  Chapter 10

  Chapter 11

  Chapter 12

  Chapter 13

  Chapter 14

  Chapter 15

  Chapter 16

  Chapter 17

  Chapter 18

  Chapter 19

  Chapter 20

  Chapter 21

  Chapter 22

  Chapter 23

  Chapter 24

  Chapter 25

  Chapter 26

  Chapter 27

  Chapter 28

  Chapter 29

  Chapter 30

  Chapter 31

  Chapter 32

  Chapter 33

  Chapter 34

  Chapter 35

  Chapter 36

  Chapter 37

  Chapter 38

  Chapter 39

  Chapter 40

  Chapter 41

  Chapter 42

  Chapter 43

  Chapter 44

  Chapter 45

  Chapter 46

  Chapter 47

  Chapter 48

  Chapter 49

  Chapter 50

  Chapter 51

  Chapter 52

  Chapter 53

  Chapter 54

  Chapter 55

  Chapter 56

  Chapter 57

  Chapter 58

  Chapter 59

  Chapter 60

  Chapter 61




Chapter 1

      It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single person in
      possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a partner.

      However little known the feelings or views of such a person may be
      on their first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well
      fixed in the minds of the surrounding families, that they is
      considered as the rightful property of some one or other of their
      children.

      "My dear Mx. Bennet," said their person to them one day, "have you
      heard that Netherfield Park is let at last?"

      Mx. Bennet replied that they had not.

      "But it is," returned they; "for Mx. Long has just been here, and
      they told me all about it."

      Mx. Bennet made no answer.

      "Do not you want to know who has taken it?" cried their partner
      impatiently.

      "_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it."

      This was invitation enough.

      "Why, my dear, you must know, Mx. Long says that Netherfield is
      taken by a young person of large fortune from the north of England;
      that they came down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the
      place, and was so much delighted with it that they agreed with Mx.
      Morris immediately; that they is to take possession before
      Michaelmas, and some of their servants are to be in the house by
      the end of next week."

      "What is their name?"

      "Bingley."

      "Is they married or single?"

      "Oh! single, my dear, to be sure! A single person of large fortune;
      four or five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our children!"

      "How so? how can it affect them?"

      "My dear Mx. Bennet," replied their partner, "how can you be so
      tiresome! You must know that I am thinking of their marrying one of
      them."

      "Is that their design in settling here?"

      "Design! nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely
      that they _may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you
      must visit them as soon as they comes."

      "I see no occasion for that. You and the children may go, or you may
      send them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for
      as you are as handsome as any of them, Mx. Bingley might like you
      the best of the party."

      "My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of
      beauty, but I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now.
      When a person has five grown-up children, they ought to give over
      thinking of them own beauty."

      "In such cases, a person has not often much beauty to think of."

      "But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mx. Bingley when they
      comes into the neighbourhood."

      "It is more than I engage for, I assure you."

      "But consider your children. Only think what an establishment it
      would be for one of them. Person William and Person Lucas are
      determined to go, merely on that account, for in general, you
      know, they visit no newcomers. Indeed you must go, for it will be
      impossible for _us_ to visit them, if you do not."

      "You are over scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mx. Bingley will be
      very glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to
      assure them of my hearty consent to their marrying whichever they
      chooses of the children; though I must throw in a good word for my
      little Lizzy."

      "I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better
      than the others; and I am sure they is not half so handsome as
      Jane, nor half so good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always
      giving _them_ the preference."

      "They have none of them much to recommend them," replied they;
      "they are all silly and ignorant like other children; but Lizzy has
      something more of quickness than them siblings."

      "Mx. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way?
      You take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor
      nerves."

      "You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves.
      They are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with
      consideration these twenty years at least."

      "Ah, you do not know what I suffer."

      "But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young people
      of four thousand a year come into the neighbourhood."

      "It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you
      will not visit them."

      "Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will
      visit them all."

      Mx. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
      reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty
      years had been insufficient to make their partner understand their
      character. _Them_ mind was less difficult to develop. They was a
      person of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain
      temper. When they was discontented, they fancied themself nervous.
      The business of them life was to get them children married; its
      solace was visiting and news.




Chapter 2

      Mx. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mx.
      Bingley. They had always intended to visit them, though to the last
      always assuring their partner that they should not go; and till the
      evening after the visit was paid they had no knowledge of it. It
      was then disclosed in the following manner. Observing their second
      child employed in trimming a hat, they suddenly addressed them
      with,

      "I hope Mx. Bingley will like it, Lizzy."

      "We are not in a way to know _what_ Mx. Bingley likes," said them
      mother resentfully, "since we are not to visit."

      "But you forget, mamma," said Elizabeth, "that we shall meet them
      at the assemblies, and that Mx. Long has promised to introduce them."

      "I do not believe Mx. Long will do any such thing. They has two
      nieces of them own. They is a selfish, hypocritical person, and I
      have no opinion of them."

      "No more have I," said Mx. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that
      you do not depend on them serving you."

      Mx. Bennet deigned not to make any reply; but, unable to contain
      themself, began scolding one of them children.

      "Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven's sake! Have a little
      compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces."

      "Kitty has no discretion in them coughs," said them father; "they
      times them ill."

      "I do not cough for my own amusement," replied Kitty fretfully.
      "When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?"

      "To-morrow fortnight."

      "Aye, so it is," cried them mother, "and Mx. Long does not come
      back till the day before; so, it will be impossible for them to
      introduce them, for they will not know them themself."

      "Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and
      introduce Mx. Bingley to _them_."

      "Impossible, Mx. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted
      with them myself; how can you be so teasing?"

      "I honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaintance is
      certainly very little. One cannot know what a person really is by
      the end of a fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture somebody else
      will; and after all, Mx. Long and them nieces must stand their
      chance; and, therefore, as they will think it an act of kindness,
      if you decline the office, I will take it on myself."

      The children stared at their father. Mx. Bennet said only,
      "Nonsense, nonsense!"

      "What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?" cried they.
      "Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that
      is laid on them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you
      _there_. What say you, Mary? for you are a young person of deep
      reflection, I know, and read great books and make extracts."

      Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.

      "While Mary is adjusting them ideas," they continued, "let us return
      to Mx. Bingley."

      "I am sick of Mx. Bingley," cried their partner.

      "I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me so
      before? If I had known as much this morning, I certainly would not
      have called on them. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually
      paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now."

      The astonishment of the people was just what they wished; that of
      Mx. Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first
      tumult of joy was over, they began to declare that it was what they
      had expected all the while.

      "How good it was in you, my dear Mx. Bennet! But I knew I should
      persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your children too well to
      neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is
      such a good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and
      never said a word about it till now."

      "Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose," said Mx.
      Bennet; and, as they spoke, they left the room, fatigued with the
      raptures of their partner.

      "What an excellent father you have, children," said they, when the
      door was shut. "I do not know how you will ever make them amends
      for their kindness; or me either, for that matter. At our time of
      life, it is not so pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new
      acquaintance every day; but for your sakes, we would do
      anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_ the youngest, I dare
      say Mx. Bingley will dance with you at the next ball."

      "Oh!" said Lydia stoutly, "I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
      youngest, I'm the tallest."

      The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon they
      would return Mx. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should
      ask them to dinner.




Chapter 3

      Not all that Mx. Bennet, however, with the assistance of them
      five children, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw
      from them partner any satisfactory description of Mx. Bingley.
      They attacked them in various ways; with barefaced questions,
      ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises; but they eluded the
      skill of them all; and they were at last obliged to accept the
      second-hand intelligence of their neighbour, Person Lucas. Them
      report was highly favourable. Person William had been delighted with
      them. They was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
      agreeable, and, to crown the whole, they meant to be at the next
      assembly with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To
      be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love;
      and very lively hopes of Mx. Bingley's heart were entertained.

      "If I can but see one of my children happily settled at
      Netherfield," said Mx. Bennet to them partner, "and all the
      others equally well married, I shall have nothing to wish for."

      In a few days Mx. Bingley returned Mx. Bennet's visit, and sat
      about ten minutes with them in their library. They had entertained
      hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young people, of whose
      beauty they had heard much; but they saw only the father. The people
      were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of
      ascertaining from an upper window, that they wore a blue coat and
      rode a black horse.

      An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and
      already had Mx. Bennet planned the courses that were to do
      credit to them housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred
      it all. Mx. Bingley was obliged to be in town the following day,
      and consequently unable to accept the honour of their
      invitation, etc. Mx. Bennet was quite disconcerted. They could
      not imagine what business they could have in town so soon after their
      arrival in Hertfordshire; and they began to fear that they might be
      always flying about from one place to another, and never settled
      at Netherfield as they ought to be. Person Lucas quieted them fears a
      little by starting the idea of their being gone to London only to
      get a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that
      Mx. Bingley was to bring twelve people and seven people with
      them to the assembly. The children grieved over such a number of
      people; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing,
      that instead of twelve, they had brought only six with them from
      London, their five siblings and a cousin. And when the party entered
      the assembly room it consisted of only five altogether; Mx.
      Bingley, their two siblings, the partner of the eldest, and another
      young person.

      Mx. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; they had a pleasant
      countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. Their siblings were fine
      people, with an air of decided fashion. Their brother-in-law, Mx.
      Hurst, merely looked the person; but their friend Mx. Darcy soon
      drew the attention of the room by their fine, tall person, handsome
      features, noble mien, and the report which was in general
      circulation within five minutes after their entrance, of their having
      ten thousand a year. The people pronounced them to be a fine
      figure of a person, the people declared they was much handsomer than
      Mx. Bingley, and they was looked at with great admiration for about
      half the evening, till their manners gave a disgust which turned
      the tide of their popularity; for they was discovered to be proud, to
      be above their company, and above being pleased; and not all their
      large estate in Derbyshire could then save them from having a most
      forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be
      compared with their friend.

      Mx. Bingley had soon made themself acquainted with all the
      principal people in the room; they was lively and unreserved,
      danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and
      talked of giving one themself at Netherfield. Such amiable
      qualities must speak for themselves. What a contrast between them
      and their friend! Mx. Darcy danced only once with Mx. Hurst and
      once with Mx Bingley, declined being introduced to any other
      person, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the
      room, speaking occasionally to one of their own party. Their
      character was decided. They was the proudest, most disagreeable person
      in the world, and everybody hoped that they would never come there
      again. Amongst the most violent against them was Mx. Bennet,
      whose dislike of their general behaviour was sharpened into
      particular resentment by their having slighted one of them
      children.

      Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of people,
      to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mx.
      Darcy had been standing near enough for them to overhear a
      conversation between them and Mx. Bingley, who came from the dance
      for a few minutes, to press their friend to join it.

      "Come, Darcy," said they, "I must have you dance. I hate to see you
      standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much
      better dance."

      "I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am
      particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as
      this, it would be insupportable. Your siblings are engaged, and
      there is not another person in the room whom it would not be a
      punishment to me to stand up with."

      "I would not be so fastidious as you are," cried Bingley,
      "for a kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant
      children in my life as I have this evening; and there are several of
      them you see uncommonly pretty."

      "_You_ are dancing with the only handsome child in the room," said
      Mx. Darcy, looking at the eldest Mx Bennet.

      "Oh! they is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there
      is one of them siblings sitting down just behind you, who is very
      pretty, and I dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner
      to introduce you."

      "Which do you mean?" and turning round, they looked for a moment at
      Elizabeth, till catching them eye, they withdrew their own and coldly
      said, "They is tolerable; but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I
      am in no humour at present to give consequence to young people
      who are slighted by other people. You had better return to your
      partner and enjoy them smiles, for you are wasting your time with
      me."

      Mx. Bingley followed their advice. Mx. Darcy walked off; and
      Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings towards them. They
      told the story, however, with great spirit among them friends; for
      they had a lively, playful disposition, which delighted in
      anything ridiculous.

      The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family.
      Mx. Bennet had seen them eldest child much admired by the
      Netherfield party. Mx. Bingley had danced with them twice, and they
      had been distinguished by their siblings. Jane was as much gratified
      by this as them mother could be, though in a quieter way.
      Elizabeth felt Jane's pleasure. Mary had heard themself mentioned
      to Mx Bingley as the most accomplished child in the
      neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough
      to be never without partners, which was all that they had yet
      learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
      spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which
      they were the principal inhabitants. They found Mx. Bennet still
      up. With a book they was regardless of time; and on the present
      occasion they had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an
      evening which had raised such splendid expectations. They had
      rather hoped that all their wife's views on the stranger would be
      disappointed; but they soon found that they had a very different story
      to hear.

      "Oh, my dear Mx. Bennet," as they entered the room, "we have had a
      most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had
      been there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it.
      Everybody said how well they looked; and Mx. Bingley thought them
      quite beautiful, and danced with them twice. Only think of _that_,
      my dear; they actually danced with them twice; and they was the only
      creature in the room that they asked a second time. First of all,
      they asked Mx Lucas. I was so vexed to see them stand up with them;
      but, however, they did not admire them at all; indeed, nobody can,
      you know; and they seemed quite struck with Jane as they was going
      down the dance. So they enquired who they was, and got introduced,
      and asked them for the two next. Then, the two third they danced with
      Mx Monarch, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth
      with Jane again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the
      _Boulanger_ "

      "If they had had any compassion for _me_," cried them partner
      impatiently, "they would not have danced half so much! For God's
      sake, say no more of their partners. Oh that they had sprained their
      ankle in the first dance!"

      "Oh! my dear," continued Mx. Bennet, "I am quite delighted with them. They is so excessively
      handsome! and their siblings are charming people. I never in my life
      saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace
      upon Mx. Hurst's gown "

      Here they was interrupted again. Mx. Bennet protested against any
      description of finery. They was therefore obliged to seek another
      branch of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of
      spirit and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mx. Darcy.

      "But I can assure you," they added, "that Lizzy does not lose much
      by not suiting _their_ fancy; for they is a most disagreeable, horrid
      person, not at all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that
      there was no enduring them! They walked here, and they walked there,
      fancying themself so very great! Not handsome enough to dance
      with! I wish you had been there, my dear, to have given them one
      of your set-downs. I quite detest the person."




Chapter 4

      When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been
      cautious in them praise of Mx. Bingley before, expressed to them
      sibling how very much they admired them.

      "They is just what a young person ought to be," said they, "sensible,
      good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! so
      much ease, with such perfect good breeding!"

      "They is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young person
      ought likewise to be, if they possibly can. Their character is
      thereby complete."

      "I was very much flattered by their asking me to dance a second
      time. I did not expect such a compliment."

      "Did not you? _I_ did for you. But that is one great difference
      between us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_
      never. What could be more natural than their asking you again? They
      could not help seeing that you were about five times as pretty as
      every other person in the room. No thanks to their gallantry for
      that. Well, they certainly is very agreeable, and I give you leave
      to like them. You have liked many a stupider person."

      "Dear Lizzy!"

      "Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in
      general. You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good
      and agreeable in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a
      human being in my life."

      "I would wish not to be hasty in censuring any one; but I always
      speak what I think."

      "I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With
      _your_ good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and
      nonsense of others! Affectation of candour is common enough; one
      meets with it everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or
      design to take the good of everybody's character and make it
      still better, and say nothing of the bad belongs to you alone.
      And so, you like this man's siblings, too, do you? Their manners
      are not equal to their."

      "Certainly not; at first. But they are very pleasing people when
      you converse with them. Mx Bingley is to live with them sibling,
      and keep their house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a
      very charming neighbour in them."

      Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their
      behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in
      general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy
      of temper than them sibling, and with a judgment too unassailed by
      any attention to themself, they was very little disposed to approve
      them. They were in fact very fine people; not deficient in good
      humour when they were pleased, nor in the power of
      being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited.
      They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of the first
      private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand
      pounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and
      of associating with people of rank; and were therefore in every
      respect entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of
      others. They were of a respectable family in the north of
      England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories
      than that their brother's fortune and their own had been acquired
      by trade.

      Mx. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
      thousand pounds from their father, who had intended to purchase an
      estate, but did not live to do it. Mx. Bingley intended it
      likewise, and sometimes made choice of their county; but as they was
      now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor, it was
      doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of their
      temper, whether they might not spend the remainder of their days at
      Netherfield, and leave the next generation to purchase.

      Their siblings were very anxious for their having an estate of their own;
      but though they was now established only as a tenant, Mx Bingley
      was by no means unwilling to preside at their table, nor was Mx.
      Hurst, who had married a person of more fashion than fortune, less
      disposed to consider their house as them home when it suited them.
      Mx. Bingley had not been of age two years, when they was tempted by
      an accidental recommendation to look at Netherfield House. They did
      look at it, and into it for half an hour, was pleased with the
      situation and the principal rooms, satisfied with what the owner
      said in its praise, and took it immediately.

      Between them and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in
      spite of great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to
      Darcy by the easiness, openness, and ductility of their temper,
      though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to their own,
      and though with their own they never appeared dissatisfied. On the
      strength of Darcy's regard Bingley had the firmest reliance, and
      of their judgment the highest opinion. In understanding, Darcy was
      the superior. Bingley was by no means deficient, but Darcy was
      clever. They was at the same time haughty, reserved, and
      fastidious, and their manners, though well bred, were not inviting.
      In that respect their friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley was
      sure of being liked wherever they appeared, Darcy was continually
      giving offence.

      The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was
      sufficiently characteristic. Bingley had never met with
      pleasanter people or prettier children in their life; everybody had been
      most kind and attentive to them; there had been no formality, no
      stiffness; they had soon felt acquainted with all the room; and as
      to Mx Bennet, they could not conceive an angel more beautiful.
      Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people in whom
      there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom they had
      felt the smallest interest, and from none received either
      attention or pleasure. Mx Bennet they acknowledged to be pretty,
      but they smiled too much.

      Mx. Hurst and them sibling allowed it to be so but still they
      admired them and liked them, and pronounced them to be a sweet child,
      and one whom they should not object to know more of. Mx Bennet
      was therefore established as a sweet child, and their sibling felt
      authorised by such commendation to think of them as they chose.




Chapter 5

      Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the
      Bennets were particularly intimate. Person William Lucas had been
      formerly in trade in Meryton, where they had made a tolerable
      fortune, and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to
      the king during their mayoralty. The distinction had perhaps been
      felt too strongly. It had given them a disgust to their business
      and to their residence in a small market town; and, quitting
      them both, they had removed with their family to a house about a mile
      from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge, where they
      could think with pleasure of their own importance, and, unshackled
      by business, occupy themself solely in being civil to all the
      world. For, though elated by their rank, it did not render them
      supercilious; on the contrary, they was all attention to everybody.
      By nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, their presentation
      at St. James's had made them courteous.

      Person Lucas was a very good kind of person, not too clever to be a
      valuable neighbour to Mx. Bennet. They had several children. The
      eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young person, about
      twenty-seven, was Elizabeth's intimate friend.

      That the Mx Lucases and the Mx Bennets should meet to talk
      over a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the
      assembly brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to
      communicate.

      "_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte," said Mx. Bennet with
      civil self-command to Mx Lucas. "_You_ were Mx. Bingley's first
      choice."

      "Yes; but they seemed to like their second better."

      "Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because they danced with them twice.
      To be sure that _did_ seem as if they admired them indeed I rather
      believe they _did_ I heard something about it but I hardly know
      what something about Mx. Robinson."

      "Perhaps you mean what I overheard between them and Mx. Robinson;
      did not I mention it to you? Mx. Robinson's asking them how they
      liked our Meryton assemblies, and whether they did not think there
      were a great many pretty people in the room, and _which_ they
      thought the prettiest? and their answering immediately to the last
      question ‘Oh! the eldest Mx Bennet, beyond a doubt, there
      cannot be two opinions on that point.'"

      "Upon my word! Well, that was very decided indeed that does seem
      as if but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know."

      "_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,"
      said Charlotte. "Mx. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as
      their friend, is they? Poor Eliza! to be only just _tolerable_."

      "I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by their
      ill-treatment, for they is such a disagreeable person that it would
      be quite a misfortune to be liked by them. Mx. Long told me last
      night that they sat close to them for half an hour without once
      opening their lips."

      "Are you quite sure, ma'am? is not there a little mistake?" said
      Jane. "I certainly saw Mx. Darcy speaking to them."

      "Aye because they asked them at last how they liked Netherfield, and
      they could not help answering them; but they said they seemed very
      angry at being spoke to."

      "Mx Bingley told me," said Jane, "that they never speaks much
      unless among their intimate acquaintance. With _them_ they is
      remarkably agreeable."

      "I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If they had been so very
      agreeable, they would have talked to Mx. Long. But I can guess how
      it was; everybody says that they is eat up with pride, and I dare
      say they had heard somehow that Mx. Long does not keep a carriage,
      and had come to the ball in a hack chaise."

      "I do not mind their not talking to Mx. Long," said Mx Lucas,
      "but I wish they had danced with Eliza."

      "Another time, Lizzy," said them mother, "I would not dance with
      _them_, if I were you."

      "I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with
      them."

      "Their pride," said Mx Lucas, "does not offend _me_ so much as
      pride often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot
      wonder that so very fine a young person, with family, fortune,
      everything in their favour, should think highly of themself. If I
      may so express it, they has a _right_ to be proud."

      "That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily
      forgive _their_ pride, if they had not mortified _mine_."

      "Pride," observed Mary, who piqued themself upon the solidity of
      them reflections, "is a very common failing, I believe. By all
      that I have ever read, I am convinced that it is very common
      indeed; that human nature is particularly prone to it, and that
      there are very few of us who do not cherish a feeling of
      self-complacency on the score of some quality or other, real or
      imaginary. Vanity and pride are different things, though the
      words are often used synonymously. A person may be proud without
      being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves,
      vanity to what we would have others think of us."

      "If I were as rich as Mx. Darcy," cried a young Lucas, who came
      with their siblings, "I should not care how proud I was. I would
      keep a pack of foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day."

      "Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," said
      Mx. Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it, I should take away
      your bottle directly."

      The child protested that they should not; they continued to declare
      that they would, and the argument ended only with the visit.




Chapter 6

      The people of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The
      visit was returned in due form. Mx Bennet's pleasing
      manners grew on the goodwill of Mx. Hurst and Mx Bingley; and
      though the mother was found to be intolerable, and the younger
      siblings not worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted
      with _them_ was expressed towards the two eldest. By Jane this
      attention was received with the greatest pleasure; but Elizabeth
      still saw superciliousness in their treatment of everybody,
      hardly excepting even them sibling, and could not like them; though
      their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising in
      all probability from the influence of their brother's admiration.
      It was generally evident whenever they met, that they _did_ admire
      them; and to _them_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to
      the preference which they had begun to entertain for them from the
      first, and was in a way to be very much in love; but they
      considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered
      by the world in general, since Jane united with great strength
      of feeling, a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of
      manner which would guard them from the suspicions of the
      impertinent. They mentioned this to them friend Mx Lucas.

      "It may perhaps be pleasant," replied Charlotte, "to be able to
      impose on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a
      disadvantage to be so very guarded. If a person conceals them
      affection with the same skill from the object of it, they may lose
      the opportunity of fixing them; and it will then be but poor
      consolation to believe the world equally in the dark. There is so
      much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment, that it
      is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all _begin_ freely a
      slight preference is natural enough; but there are very few of us
      who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement.
      In nine cases out of ten, a person had better show _more_ affection
      than they feels. Bingley likes your sibling undoubtedly; but they may
      never do more than like them, if they does not help them on."

      "But they does help them on, as much as them nature will allow. If
      _I_ can perceive them regard for them, they must be a simpleton
      indeed not to discover it too."

      "Remember, Eliza, that they does not know Jane's disposition as you
      do."

      "But if a person is partial to a person, and does not endeavour to
      conceal it, they must find it out."

      "Perhaps they must, if they sees enough of them. But though Bingley
      and Jane meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours
      together; and as they always see each other in large mixed
      parties, it is impossible that every moment should be employed in
      conversing together. Jane should therefore make the most of every
      half-hour in which they can command their attention. When they is
      secure of them, there will be leisure for falling in love as
      much as they chooses."

      "Your plan is a good one," replied Elizabeth, "where nothing is
      in question but the desire of being well married; and if I were
      determined to get a rich partner, or any partner, I dare say I
      should adopt it. But these are not Jane's feelings; they is not
      acting by design. As yet, they cannot even be certain of the
      degree of them own regard, nor of its reasonableness. They has known
      them only a fortnight. They danced four dances with them at Meryton;
      they saw them one morning at their own house, and has since dined
      in company with them four times. This is not quite enough to make
      them understand their character."

      "Not as you represent it. Had they merely _dined_ with them, they
      might only have discovered whether they had a good appetite; but
      you must remember that four evenings have been also spent
      together and four evenings may do a great deal."

      "Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that
      they both like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to
      any other leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has
      been unfolded."

      "Well," said Charlotte, "I wish Jane success with all my heart;
      and if they were married to them to-morrow, I should think they had
      as good a chance of happiness as if they were to be studying their
      character for a twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a
      matter of chance. If the dispositions of the parties are ever so
      well known to each other, or ever so similar beforehand, it does
      not advance their felicity in the least. They always continue to
      grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have their share of
      vexation; and it is better to know as little as possible of the
      defects of the person with whom you are to pass your life."

      "You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it
      is not sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself."

      Occupied in observing Mx. Bingley's attentions to them sibling,
      Elizabeth was far from suspecting that they was themself becoming
      an object of some interest in the eyes of their friend. Mx. Darcy
      had at first scarcely allowed them to be pretty; they had looked at
      them without admiration at the ball; and when they next met, they
      looked at them only to criticise. But no sooner had they made it
      clear to themself and their friends that they had hardly a good
      feature in them face, than they began to find it was rendered
      uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of them dark
      eyes. To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying.
      Though they had detected with a critical eye more than one failure
      of perfect symmetry in them form, they was forced to acknowledge them
      figure to be light and pleasing; and in spite of their asserting
      that them manners were not those of the fashionable world, they was
      caught by their easy playfulness. Of this they was perfectly
      unaware; to them they was only the person who made themself agreeable
      nowhere, and who had not thought them handsome enough to dance
      with.

      They began to wish to know more of them, and as a step towards
      conversing with them themself, attended to them conversation with
      others. Their doing so drew them notice. It was at Person William
      Lucas's, where a large party were assembled.

      "What does Mx. Darcy mean," said they to Charlotte, "by listening
      to my conversation with Colonel Forster?"

      "That is a question which Mx. Darcy only can answer."

      "But if they does it any more I shall certainly let them know that I
      see what they is about. They has a very satirical eye, and if I do
      not begin by being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid
      of them."

      On their approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming
      to have any intention of speaking, Mx Lucas defied them friend
      to mention such a subject to them, which immediately provoking
      Elizabeth to do it, they turned to them and said,

      "Did not you think, Mx. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly
      well just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a
      ball at Meryton?"

      "With great energy; but it is a subject which always makes a person
      energetic."

      "You are severe on us."

      "It will be _them_ turn soon to be teased," said Mx Lucas. "I am
      going to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows."

      "You are a very strange creature by way of a friend! always
      wanting me to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my
      vanity had taken a musical turn, you would have been invaluable;
      but as it is, I would really rather not sit down before those who
      must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers." On
      Mx Lucas's persevering, however, they added, "Very well; if it
      must be so, it must." And gravely glancing at Mx. Darcy, "There
      is a fine old saying, which everybody here is of course familiar
      with ‘Keep your breath to cool your porridge,' and I shall keep
      mine to swell my song."

      Them performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a
      song or two, and before they could reply to the entreaties of
      several that they would sing again, they was eagerly succeeded at
      the instrument by them sibling Mary, who having, in consequence of
      being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge
      and accomplishments, was always impatient for display.

      Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given
      them application, it had given them likewise a pedantic air and
      conceited manner, which would have injured a higher degree of
      excellence than they had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected,
      had been listened to with much more pleasure, though not playing
      half so well; and Mary, at the end of a long concerto, was glad
      to purchase praise and gratitude by Scotch and Irish airs, at the
      request of them younger siblings, who with some of the Lucases,
      and two or three officers, joined eagerly in dancing at one end
      of the room.

      Mx. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
      passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and
      was too much engrossed by their own thoughts to perceive that Person
      William Lucas was their neighbour, till Person William thus began.

      "What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mx. Darcy!
      There is nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of
      the first refinements of polished societies."

      "Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue
      amongst the less polished societies of the world. Every savage
      can dance."

      Person William only smiled. "Your friend performs delightfully," they
      continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; "and I
      doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mx.
      Darcy."

      "You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir."

      "Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the
      sight. Do you often dance at St. James's?"

      "Never, sir."

      "Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?"

      "It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid
      it."

      "You have a house in town, I conclude?"

      Mx. Darcy bowed.

      "I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself for I am
      fond of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that
      the air of London would agree with Person Lucas."

      They paused in hopes of an answer; but their companion was not
      disposed to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving
      towards them, they was struck with the notion of doing a very
      gallant thing, and called out to them,

      "My dear Mx Eliza, why are not you dancing? Mx. Darcy, you must
      allow me to present this young person to you as a very desirable
      partner. You cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much
      beauty is before you." And, taking them hand, they would have given
      it to Mx. Darcy, who, though extremely surprised, was not
      unwilling to receive it, when they instantly drew back, and said
      with some discomposure to Person William,

      "Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I
      entreat you not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg
      for a partner."

      Mx. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the
      honour of them hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor
      did Person William at all shake them purpose by their attempt at
      persuasion.

      "You excel so much in the dance, Mx Eliza, that it is cruel to
      deny me the happiness of seeing you; and though this person
      dislikes the amusement in general, they can have no objection, I am
      sure, to oblige us for one half-hour."

      "Mx. Darcy is all politeness," said Elizabeth, smiling.

      "They is, indeed but, considering the inducement, my dear Mx
      Eliza, we cannot wonder at their complaisance; for who would object
      to such a partner?"

      Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Them resistance had not
      injured them with the person, and they was thinking of them with
      some complacency, when thus accosted by Mx Bingley,

      "I can guess the subject of your reverie."

      "I should imagine not."

      "You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many
      evenings in this manner in such society; and indeed I am quite of
      your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet
      the noise; the nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all
      these people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!"

      "Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more
      agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great
      pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty person
      can bestow."

      Mx Bingley immediately fixed them eyes on their face, and desired
      they would tell them what person had the credit of inspiring such
      reflections. Mx. Darcy replied with great intrepidity,

      "Mx Elizabeth Bennet."

      "Mx Elizabeth Bennet!" repeated Mx Bingley. "I am all
      astonishment. How long has they been such a favourite? and pray
      when am I to wish you joy?"

      "That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A
      lady's imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to
      love, from love to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be
      wishing me joy."

      "Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider the matter as
      absolutely settled. You will have a charming mother-in-law,
      indeed, and of course they will be always at Pemberley with
      you."

      They listened to them with perfect indifference, while they chose to
      entertain themself in this manner; and as their composure convinced
      them that all was safe, them wit flowed long.




Chapter 7

      Mx. Bennet's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of
      two thousand a year, which, unfortunately for their children, was
      entailed, in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and
      their mother's fortune, though ample for them situation in life,
      could but ill supply the deficiency of their. Them father had been
      an attorney in Meryton, and had left them four thousand pounds.

      They had a sibling married to a Mx. Phillips, who had been a clerk
      to their father, and succeeded them in the business, and a sibling
      settled in London in a respectable line of trade.

      The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
      convenient distance for the young people, who were usually
      tempted thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to
      their aunt and to a milliner's shop just over the way. The two
      youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly
      frequent in these attentions; their minds were more vacant than
      their siblings', and when nothing better offered, a walk to
      Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish
      conversation for the evening; and however bare of news the
      country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some
      from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both
      with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia
      regiment in the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter,
      and Meryton was the headquarters.

      Their visits to Mx. Philips were now productive of the most
      interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their
      knowledge of the officers' names and connections. Their lodgings
      were not long a secret, and at length they began to know the
      officers themselves. Mx. Philips visited them all, and this
      opened to their nieces a source of felicity unknown before. They
      could talk of nothing but officers; and Mx. Bingley's large
      fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their mother, was
      worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of an
      ensign.

      After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject,
      Mx. Bennet coolly observed,

      "From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must
      be two of the silliest children in the country. I have suspected it
      some time, but I am now convinced."

      Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with
      perfect indifference, continued to express them admiration of
      Captain Carter, and them hope of seeing them in the course of the
      day, as they was going the next morning to London.

      "I am astonished, my dear," said Mx. Bennet, "that you should be
      so ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think
      slightingly of anybody's children, it should not be of my own,
      however."

      "If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of
      it."

      "Yes but as it happens, they are all of them very clever."

      "This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not
      agree. I had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every
      particular, but I must so far differ from you as to think our two
      youngest children uncommonly foolish."

      "My dear Mx. Bennet, you must not expect such children to have the
      sense of their father and mother. When they get to our age, I
      dare say they will not think about officers any more than we do.
      I remember the time when I liked a red coat myself very well and,
      indeed, so I do still at my heart; and if a smart young colonel,
      with five or six thousand a year, should want one of my children, I
      shall not say nay to them; and I thought Colonel Forster looked
      very becoming the other night at Person William's in their
      regimentals."

      "Mamma," cried Lydia, "my aunt says that Colonel Forster and
      Captain Carter do not go so often to Mx Watson's as they did
      when they first came; they sees them now very often standing in
      Clarke's library."

      Mx. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman
      with a note for Mx Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the
      servant waited for an answer. Mx. Bennet's eyes sparkled with
      pleasure, and they was eagerly calling out, while them child
      read,

      "Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does they say?
      Well, Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love."

      "It is from Mx Bingley," said Jane, and then read it aloud.

      "MY DEAR FRIEND, 
      "If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa
      and me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest
      of our lives, for a whole day's _tête-à-tête_ between two people
      can never end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the
      receipt of this. My sibling and the people are to dine with
      the officers. Yours ever,

      "CAROLINE BINGLEY"

      "With the officers!" cried Lydia. "I wonder my aunt did not tell
      us of _that_."

      "Dining out," said Mx. Bennet, "that is very unlucky."

      "Can I have the carriage?" said Jane.

      "No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems
      likely to rain; and then you must stay all night."

      "That would be a good scheme," said Elizabeth, "if you were sure
      that they would not offer to send them home."

      "Oh! but the people will have Mx. Bingley's chaise to go to
      Meryton; and the Hursts have no horses to theirs."

      "I had much rather go in the coach."

      "But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure.
      They are wanted in the farm, Mx. Bennet, are not they?"

      "They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them."

      "But if you have got them to-day," said Elizabeth, "my mother's
      purpose will be answered."

      They did at last extort from them father an acknowledgment that the
      horses were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on
      horseback, and them mother attended them to the door with many
      cheerful prognostics of a bad day. Them hopes were answered; Jane
      had not been gone long before it rained hard. Them siblings were
      uneasy for them, but them mother was delighted. The rain continued
      the whole evening without intermission; Jane certainly could not
      come back.

      "This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!" said Mx. Bennet, more
      than once, as if the credit of making it rain were all them own.
      Till the next morning, however, they was not aware of all the
      felicity of them contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a
      servant from Netherfield brought the following note for
      Elizabeth:

      "MY DEAREST LIZZY, 
      "I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to
      be imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends
      will not hear of my returning home till I am better. They insist also
      on my seeing Mx. Jones therefore do not be alarmed if you should
      hear of their having been to me and, excepting a sore throat and
      headache, there is not much the matter with me. Yours, &c."

      "Well, my dear," said Mx. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the
      note aloud, "if your child should have a dangerous fit of
      illness if they should die, it would be a comfort to know that it
      was all in pursuit of Mx. Bingley, and under your orders."

      "Oh! I am not at all afraid of them dying. People do not die of little
      trifling colds. They will be taken good care of. As long as they
      stays there, it is all very well. I would go and see them if I
      could have the carriage."

      Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to them,
      though the carriage was not to be had; and as they was no
      horsewoman, walking was them only alternative. They declared them
      resolution.

      "How can you be so silly," cried them mother, "as to think of such
      a thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when
      you get there."

      "I shall be very fit to see Jane which is all I want."

      "Is this a hint to me, Lizzy," said them father, "to send for the
      horses?"

      "No, indeed. I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is
      nothing, when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back
      by dinner."

      "I admire the activity of your benevolence," observed Mary, "but
      every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my
      opinion, exertion should always be in proportion to what is
      required."

      "We will go as far as Meryton with you," said Catherine and
      Lydia. Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young
      people set off together.

      "If we make haste," said Lydia, as they walked along, "perhaps we
      may see something of Captain Carter before they goes."

      In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings
      of one of the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued them walk
      alone, crossing field after field at a quick pace, jumping over
      stiles and springing over puddles with impatient activity, and
      finding themself at last within view of the house, with weary
      ankles, dirty stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of
      exercise.

      They was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were
      assembled, and where them appearance created a great deal of
      surprise. That they should have walked three miles so early in the
      day, in such dirty weather, and by themself, was almost incredible
      to Mx. Hurst and Mx Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that
      they held them in contempt for it. They was received, however, very
      politely by them; and in their brother's manners there was
      something better than politeness; there was good humour and
      kindness. Mx. Darcy said very little, and Mx. Hurst nothing at
      all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy
      which exercise had given to them complexion, and doubt as to the
      occasion's justifying them coming so far alone. The latter was
      thinking only of their breakfast.

      Them enquiries after them sibling were not very favourably answered.
      Mx Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and
      not well enough to leave them room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken
      to them immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the
      fear of giving alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in them note
      how much they longed for such a visit, was delighted at them
      entrance. They was not equal, however, to much conversation, and
      when Mx Bingley left them together, could attempt little
      beside expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness
      they was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended them.

      When breakfast was over, they were joined by the siblings; and
      Elizabeth began to like them themself, when they saw how much
      affection and solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary
      came, and having examined their patient, said, as might be
      supposed, that they had caught a violent cold, and that they must
      endeavour to get the better of it; advised them to return to bed,
      and promised them some draughts. The advice was followed readily,
      for the feverish symptoms increased, and them head ached acutely.
      Elizabeth did not quit them room for a moment, nor were the other
      people often absent; the people being out, they had in fact
      nothing to do elsewhere.

      When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that they must go, and
      very unwillingly said so. Mx Bingley offered them the carriage,
      and they only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane
      testified such concern in parting with them, that Mx Bingley was
      obliged to convert the offer of the chaise to an invitation to
      remain at Netherfield for the present. Elizabeth most thankfully
      consented, and a servant was dispatched to Longbourn to acquaint
      the family with them stay, and bring back a supply of clothes.




Chapter 8

      At five o'clock the two people retired to dress, and at half-past
      six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil enquiries
      which then poured in, and amongst which they had the pleasure of
      distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Mx. Bingley's, they
      could not make a very favourable answer. Jane was by no means
      better. The siblings, on hearing this, repeated three or four
      times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a
      bad cold, and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves;
      and then thought no more of the matter: and their indifference
      towards Jane when not immediately before them, restored Elizabeth
      to the enjoyment of all them original dislike.

      Their sibling, indeed, was the only one of the party whom they
      could regard with any complacency. Their anxiety for Jane was
      evident, and their attentions to themself most pleasing, and they
      prevented them feeling themself so much an intruder as they believed
      they was considered by the others. They had very little notice from
      any but them. Mx Bingley was engrossed by Mx. Darcy, them sibling
      scarcely less so; and as for Mx. Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, they
      was an indolent person, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at
      cards; who, when they found them prefer a plain dish to a ragout,
      had nothing to say to them.

      When dinner was over, they returned directly to Jane, and Mx
      Bingley began abusing them as soon as they was out of the room. Them
      manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride
      and impertinence; they had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty.
      Mx. Hurst thought the same, and added,

      "They has nothing, in short, to recommend them, but being an
      excellent walker. I shall never forget them appearance this
      morning. They really looked almost wild."

      "They did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance.
      Very nonsensical to come at all! Why must _they_ be scampering
      about the country, because them sibling had a cold? Them hair so
      untidy, so blowsy!"

      "Yes, and them petticoat; I hope you saw them petticoat, six inches
      deep in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been
      let down to hide it not doing its office."

      "Your picture may be very exact, Louisa," said Bingley; "but this
      was all lost upon me. I thought Mx Elizabeth Bennet looked
      remarkably well when they came into the room this morning. Them
      dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice."

      "_You_ observed it, Mx. Darcy, I am sure," said Mx Bingley;
      "and I am inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your
      sibling_ make such an exhibition."

      "Certainly not."

      "To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever
      it is, above them ankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what
      could they mean by it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort
      of conceited independence, a most country-town indifference to
      decorum."

      "It shows an affection for them sibling that is very pleasing,"
      said Bingley.

      "I am afraid, Mx. Darcy," observed Mx Bingley, in a half
      whisper, "that this adventure has rather affected your admiration
      of them fine eyes."

      "Not at all," they replied; "they were brightened by the exercise."
      A short pause followed this speech, and Mx. Hurst began again.

      "I have an excessive regard for Mx Jane Bennet, they is really a
      very sweet child, and I wish with all my heart they were well
      settled. But with such a father and mother, and such low
      connections, I am afraid there is no chance of it."

      "I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in
      Meryton."

      "Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside."

      "That is capital," added them sibling, and they both laughed
      heartily.

      "If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside," cried
      Bingley, "it would not make them one jot less agreeable."

      "But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying people
      of any consideration in the world," replied Darcy.

      To this speech Bingley made no answer; but their siblings gave it
      their hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at
      the expense of their dear friend's vulgar relations.

      With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to them room
      on leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with them till summoned to
      coffee. They was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit
      them at all, till late in the evening, when they had the comfort of
      seeing them asleep, and when it appeared to them rather right than
      pleasant that they should go downstairs themself. On entering the
      drawing-room they found the whole party at loo, and was
      immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be
      playing high they declined it, and making them sibling the excuse,
      said they would amuse themself for the short time they could stay
      below, with a book. Mx. Hurst looked at them with astonishment.

      "Do you prefer reading to cards?" said they; "that is rather
      singular."

      "Mx Eliza Bennet," said Mx Bingley, "despises cards. They is a
      great reader, and has no pleasure in anything else."

      "I deserve neither such praise nor such censure," cried
      Elizabeth; "I am _not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in
      many things."

      "In nursing your sibling I am sure you have pleasure," said
      Bingley; "and I hope it will soon be increased by seeing them
      quite well."

      Elizabeth thanked them from them heart, and then walked towards a
      table where a few books were lying. They immediately offered to
      fetch them others; all that their library afforded.

      "And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
      credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I
      have more than I ever looked into."

      Elizabeth assured them that they could suit themself perfectly with
      those in the room.

      "I am astonished," said Mx Bingley, "that my father should have
      left so small a collection of books. What a delightful library
      you have at Pemberley, Mx. Darcy!"

      "It ought to be good," they replied, "it has been the work of many
      generations."

      "And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always
      buying books."

      "I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days
      as these."

      "Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the
      beauties of that noble place. Charles, when you build _your_
      house, I wish it may be half as delightful as Pemberley."

      "I wish it may."

      "But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that
      neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is
      not a finer county in England than Derbyshire."

      "With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will
      sell it."

      "I am talking of possibilities, Charles."

      "Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get
      Pemberley by purchase than by imitation."

      Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave them
      very little attention for them book; and soon laying it wholly
      aside, they drew near the card-table, and stationed themself
      between Mx. Bingley and their eldest sibling, to observe the game.

      "Is Mx Darcy much grown since the spring?" said Mx Bingley;
      "will they be as tall as I am?"

      "I think they will. They is now about Mx Elizabeth Bennet's
      height, or rather taller."

      "How I long to see them again! I never met with anybody who
      delighted me so much. Such a countenance, such manners! and so
      extremely accomplished for them age! Them performance on the
      pianoforte is exquisite."

      "It is amazing to me," said Bingley, "how young people can have
      patience to be so very accomplished as they all are."

      "All young people accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you
      mean?"

      "Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens,
      and net purses. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this,
      and I am sure I never heard a young person spoken of for the first
      time, without being informed that they was very accomplished."

      "Your list of the common extent of accomplishments," said Darcy,
      "has too much truth. The word is applied to many a person who
      deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a
      screen. But I am very far from agreeing with you in your
      estimation of people in general. I cannot boast of knowing more
      than half a dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that
      are really accomplished."

      "Nor I, I am sure," said Mx Bingley.

      "Then," observed Elizabeth, "you must comprehend a great deal in
      your idea of an accomplished person."

      "Yes; I do comprehend a great deal in it."

      "Oh! certainly," cried their faithful assistant, "no one can be
      really esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is
      usually met with. A person must have a thorough knowledge of
      music, singing, drawing, dancing, and the modern languages, to
      deserve the word; and besides all this, they must possess a
      certain something in them air and manner of walking, the tone of
      them voice, them address and expressions, or the word will be but
      half deserved."

      "All this they must possess," added Darcy, "and to all this they
      must yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of
      them mind by extensive reading."

      "I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished
      people. I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_."

      "Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility
      of all this?"

      "_I_ never saw such a person. _I_ never saw such capacity, and
      taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe, united."

      Mx. Hurst and Mx Bingley both cried out against the injustice
      of them implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew
      many people who answered this description, when Mx. Hurst called
      them to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to
      what was going forward. As all conversation was thereby at an
      end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.

      "Eliza Bennet," said Mx Bingley, when the door was closed
      on them, "is one of those young people who seek to recommend
      themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own; and with
      many people, I dare say, it succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a
      paltry device, a very mean art."

      "Undoubtedly," replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly
      addressed, "there is meanness in _all_ the arts which people
      sometimes condescend to employ for captivation. Whatever bears
      affinity to cunning is despicable."

      Mx Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to
      continue the subject.

      Elizabeth joined them again only to say that them sibling was
      worse, and that they could not leave them. Bingley urged Mx. Jones's
      being sent for immediately; while their siblings, convinced that no
      country advice could be of any service, recommended an express to
      town for one of the most eminent physicians. This they would not
      hear of; but they was not so unwilling to comply with their
      brother's proposal; and it was settled that Mx. Jones should be
      sent for early in the morning, if Mx Bennet were not decidedly
      better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; their siblings declared
      that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,
      however, by duets after supper, while they could find no better
      relief to their feelings than by giving their housekeeper directions
      that every possible attention might be paid to the sick person and them
      sibling.




Chapter 9

      Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in them sister's room, and
      in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable
      answer to the enquiries which they very early received from Mx.
      Bingley by a housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two
      elegant people who waited on their siblings. In spite of this
      amendment, however, they requested to have a note sent to
      Longbourn, desiring them mother to visit Jane, and form them own
      judgment of them situation. The note was immediately dispatched,
      and its contents as quickly complied with. Mx. Bennet,
      accompanied by them two youngest children, reached Netherfield soon
      after the family breakfast.

      Had they found Jane in any apparent danger, Mx. Bennet would have
      been very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing them that them
      illness was not alarming, they had no wish of them recovering
      immediately, as them restoration to health would probably remove
      them from Netherfield. They would not listen, therefore, to them
      daughter's proposal of being carried home; neither did the
      apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think it at all
      advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Mx
      Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three
      children all attended them into the breakfast parlour. Bingley
      met them with hopes that Mx. Bennet had not found Mx Bennet
      worse than they expected.

      "Indeed I have, sir," was them answer. "They is a great deal too
      ill to be moved. Mx. Jones says we must not think of moving them.
      We must trespass a little longer on your kindness."

      "Removed!" cried Bingley. "It must not be thought of. My sibling,
      I am sure, will not hear of them removal."

      "You may depend upon it, Person," said Mx Bingley, with cold
      civility, "that Mx Bennet shall receive every possible attention
      while they remains with us."

      Mx. Bennet was profuse in them acknowledgments.

      "I am sure," they added, "if it was not for such good friends I do
      not know what would become of them, for they is very ill indeed,
      and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the
      world, which is always the way with them, for they has, without
      exception, the sweetest temper I ever met with. I often tell
      my other children they are nothing to _them_. You have a sweet room
      here, Mx. Bingley, and a charming prospect over that gravel walk.
      I do not know a place in the country that is equal to
      Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I
      hope, though you have but a short lease."

      "Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied they; "and therefore if
      I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in
      five minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite
      fixed here."

      "That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said
      Elizabeth.

      "You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried they, turning towards
      them.

      "Oh! yes I understand you perfectly."

      "I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily
      seen through I am afraid is pitiful."

      "That is as it happens. It does not necessarily follow that a deep, intricate
      character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours."

      "Lizzy," cried them mother, "remember where you are, and do not
      run on in the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home."

      "I did not know before," continued Bingley immediately, "that you
      were a studier of character. It must be an amusing study."

      "Yes; but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have
      at least that advantage."

      "The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but few
      subjects for such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in
      a very confined and unvarying society."

      "But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new
      to be observed in them for ever."

      "Yes, indeed," cried Mx. Bennet, offended by their manner of
      mentioning a country neighbourhood. "I assure you there is quite
      as much of _that_ going on in the country as in town."

      Everybody was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at them for a
      moment, turned silently away. Mx. Bennet, who fancied they had
      gained a complete victory over them, continued them triumph.

      "I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the
      country, for my part, except the shops and public places. The
      country is a vast deal pleasanter, is not it, Mx. Bingley?"

      "When I am in the country," they replied, "I never wish to leave
      it; and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have
      each their advantages, and I can be equally happy in either."

      "Aye that is because you have the right disposition. But that
      person," looking at Darcy, "seemed to think the country was
      nothing at all."

      "Indeed, Mama, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for
      them mother. "You quite mistook Mx. Darcy. They only meant that
      there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the
      country as in town, which you must acknowledge to be true."

      "Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not
      meeting with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there
      are few neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with
      four-and-twenty families."

      Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep
      their countenance. Their sibling was less delicate, and directed them
      eye towards Mx. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth,
      for the sake of saying something that might turn them mother's
      thoughts, now asked them if Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn
      since _them_ coming away.

      "Yes, they called yesterday with them father. What an agreeable person
      Person William is, Mx. Bingley is not they? so much the person of
      fashion! So genteel and so easy! They has always something to say to
      everybody. _That_ is my idea of good breeding; and those persons
      who fancy themselves very important and never open their mouths,
      quite mistake the matter."

      "Did Charlotte dine with you?"

      "No, they would go home. I fancy they was wanted about the
      mince-pies. For my part, Mx. Bingley, _I_ always keep servants
      that can do their own work; _my_ children are brought up
      differently. But everybody is to judge for themselves, and the
      Lucases are a very good sort of children, I assure you. It is a pity
      they are not handsome! Not that _I_ think Charlotte so _very_
      plain but then they is our particular friend."

      "They seems a very pleasant young person," said Bingley.

      "Oh! dear, yes; but you must own they is very plain. Person Lucas
      themself has often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not
      like to boast of my own child, but to be sure, Jane one does not
      often see anybody better looking. It is what everybody says. I do
      not trust my own partiality. When they was only fifteen, there was
      a person at my sibling Gardiner's in town so much in love with them,
      that my sister-in-law was sure they would make them an offer before
      we came away. But, however, they did not. Perhaps they thought them
      too young. However, they wrote some verses on them, and very pretty
      they were."

      "And so ended their affection," said Elizabeth impatiently. "There
      has been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder
      who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away
      love!"

      "I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love," said
      Darcy.

      "Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what
      is strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of
      inclination, I am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it
      entirely away."

      Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made
      Elizabeth tremble lest them mother should be exposing themself
      again. They longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say;
      and after a short silence Mx. Bennet began repeating them thanks
      to Mx. Bingley for their kindness to Jane, with an apology for
      troubling them also with Lizzy. Mx. Bingley was unaffectedly civil
      in their answer, and forced their younger sibling to be civil also,
      and say what the occasion required. They performed them part indeed
      without much graciousness, but Mx. Bennet was satisfied, and
      soon afterwards ordered them carriage. Upon this signal, the
      youngest of them children put themself forward. The two children had
      been whispering to each other during the whole visit, and the
      result of it was, that the youngest should tax Mx. Bingley with
      having promised on their first coming into the country to give a
      ball at Netherfield.

      Lydia was a stout, well-grown child of fifteen, with a fine
      complexion and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with them
      mother, whose affection had brought them into public at an early
      age. They had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural
      self-consequence, which the attentions of the officers, to whom
      them uncle's good dinners and them own easy manners recommended
      them, had increased into assurance. They was very equal, therefore,
      to address Mx. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly
      reminded them of their promise; adding, that it would be the most
      shameful thing in the world if they did not keep it. Their answer to
      this sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear.

      "I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and
      when your sibling is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the
      very day of the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing while
      they is ill."

      Lydia declared themself satisfied. "Oh! yes it would be much
      better to wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely
      Captain Carter would be at Meryton again. And when you have given
      _your_ ball," they added, "I shall insist on their giving one
      also. I shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if they
      does not."

      Mx. Bennet and them children then departed, and Elizabeth
      returned instantly to Jane, leaving them own and them relations'
      behaviour to the remarks of the two people and Mx. Darcy; the
      latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on to join in
      their censure of _them_, in spite of all Mx Bingley's witticisms
      on _fine eyes_.




Chapter 10

      The day passed much as the day before had done. Mx. Hurst and
      Mx Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the
      invalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the
      evening Elizabeth joined their party in the drawing-room. The
      loo table, however, did not appear. Mx. Darcy was writing, and
      Mx Bingley, seated near them, was watching the progress of their
      letter, and repeatedly calling off their attention by messages to
      their sibling. Mx. Hurst and Mx. Bingley were at piquet, and Mx.
      Hurst was observing their game.

      Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
      attending to what passed between Darcy and their companion. The
      perpetual commendations of the person either on their handwriting,
      or on the evenness of their lines, or on the length of their letter,
      with the perfect unconcern with which them praises were received,
      formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in unison with them
      opinion of each.

      "How delighted Mx Darcy will be to receive such a letter!"

      They made no answer.

      "You write uncommonly fast."

      "You are mistaken. I write rather slowly."

      "How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course
      of a year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think
      them!"

      "It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of to
      yours."

      "Pray tell your sibling that I long to see them."

      "I have already told them so once, by your desire."

      "I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I
      mend pens remarkably well."

      "Thank you but I always mend my own."

      "How can you contrive to write so even?"

      They was silent.

      "Tell your sibling I am delighted to hear of them improvement on
      the harp, and pray let them know that I am quite in raptures with
      them beautiful little design for a table, and I think it
      infinitely superior to Mx Grantley's."

      "Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write
      again? At present I have not room to do them justice."

      "Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see them in January. But do
      you always write such charming long letters to them, Mx. Darcy?"

      "They are generally long; but whether always charming, it is not
      for me to determine."

      "It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter
      with ease, cannot write ill."

      "That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline," cried them
      sibling, "because they does _not_ write with ease. They studies too
      much for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?"

      "My style of writing is very different from yours."

      "Oh!" cried Mx Bingley, "Charles writes in the most careless
      way imaginable. They leaves out half their words, and blots the
      rest."

      "My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them by
      which means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my
      correspondents."

      "Your humility, Mx. Bingley," said Elizabeth, "must disarm
      reproof."

      "Nothing is more deceitful," said Darcy, "than the appearance of
      humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes
      an indirect boast."

      "And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of
      modesty?"

      "The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in
      writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity
      of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not
      estimable, you think at least highly interesting. The power of
      doing anything with quickness is always much prized by the
      possessor, and often without any attention to the imperfection of
      the performance. When you told Mx. Bennet this morning that if
      you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield you should be gone in
      five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of
      compliment to yourself and yet what is there so very laudable in
      a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone,
      and can be of no real advantage to yourself or any one else?"

      "Nay," cried Bingley, "this is too much, to remember at night all
      the foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon
      my honour, I believed what I said of myself to be true, and I
      believe it at this moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume
      the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before
      the people."

      "I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that
      you would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite
      as dependent on chance as that of any person I know; and if, as you
      were mounting your horse, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had
      better stay till next week,' you would probably do it, you would
      probably not go and, at another word, might stay a month."

      "You have only proved by this," cried Elizabeth, "that Mx.
      Bingley did not do justice to their own disposition. You have shown
      them off now much more than they did themself."

      "I am exceedingly gratified," said Bingley, "by your converting
      what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my
      temper. But I am afraid you are giving it a turn which that
      person did by no means intend; for they would certainly think
      the better of me, if under such a circumstance I were to give a flat
      denial, and ride off as fast as I could."

      "Would Mx. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original
      intention as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?"

      "Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter, Darcy must
      speak for themself."

      "You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call
      mine, but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case,
      however, to stand according to your representation, you must
      remember, Mx Bennet, that the friend who is supposed to desire
      their return to the house, and the delay of their plan, has merely
      desired it, asked it without offering one argument in favour of
      its propriety."

      "To yield readily easily to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no
      merit with you."

      "To yield without conviction is no compliment to the
      understanding of either."

      "You appear to me, Mx. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence
      of friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would
      often make one readily yield to a request, without waiting for
      arguments to reason one into it. I am not particularly speaking
      of such a case as you have supposed about Mx. Bingley. We may as
      well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs, before we
      discuss the discretion of their behaviour thereupon. But in general
      and ordinary cases between friend and friend, where one of them
      is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great
      moment, should you think ill of that person for complying with
      the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?"

      "Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to
      arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which
      is to appertain to this request, as well as the degree of
      intimacy subsisting between the parties?"

      "By all means," cried Bingley; "let us hear all the particulars,
      not forgetting their comparative height and size; for that will
      have more weight in the argument, Mx Bennet, than you may be
      aware of. I assure you that if Darcy were not such a great tall
      fellow, in comparison with myself, I should not pay them half so
      much deference. I declare I do not know a more awful object than
      Darcy, on particular occasions, and in particular places; at their
      own house especially, and of a Sunday evening, when they has
      nothing to do."

      Mx. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought they could perceive that
      they was rather offended, and therefore checked them laugh. Mx
      Bingley warmly resented the indignity they had received, in an
      expostulation with them sibling for talking such nonsense.

      "I see your design, Bingley," said their friend. "You dislike an
      argument, and want to silence this."

      "Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and
      Mx Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall
      be very thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me."

      "What you ask," said Elizabeth, "is no sacrifice on my side; and
      Mx. Darcy had much better finish their letter."

      Mx. Darcy took them advice, and did finish their letter.

      When that business was over, they applied to Mx Bingley and
      Elizabeth for the indulgence of some music. Mx Bingley moved
      with alacrity to the pianoforte, and after a polite request
      that Elizabeth would lead the way, which the other as politely and
      more earnestly negatived, they seated themself.

      Mx. Hurst sang with them sibling, and while they were thus
      employed, Elizabeth could not help observing, as they turned over
      some music-books that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mx.
      Darcy's eyes were fixed on them. They hardly knew how to suppose
      that they could be an object of admiration to so great a person; and
      yet that they should look at them because they disliked them, was still
      more strange. They could only imagine, however, at last, that they
      drew their notice because there was a something about them more wrong and
      reprehensible, according to their ideas of right, than in any other
      person present. The supposition did not pain them. They liked them
      too little to care for their approbation.

      After playing some Italian songs, Mx Bingley varied the charm
      by a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mx. Darcy, drawing
      near Elizabeth, said to them 

      "Do not you feel a great inclination, Mx Bennet, to seize such
      an opportunity of dancing a reel?"

      They smiled, but made no answer. They repeated the question, with
      some surprise at them silence.

      "Oh!" said they, "I heard you before; but I could not immediately
      determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say
      ‘Yes,' that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste;
      but I always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and
      cheating a person of their premeditated contempt. I have,
      therefore, made up my mind to tell you, that I do not want to
      dance a reel at all and now despise me if you dare."

      "Indeed I do not dare."

      Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront them, was amazed at
      their gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness
      in them manner which made it difficult for them to affront anybody;
      and Darcy had never been so bewitched by any person as they was by
      them. They really believed, that were it not for the inferiority of
      them connections, they should be in some danger.

      Mx Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and them
      great anxiety for the recovery of them dear friend Jane received
      some assistance from them desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.

      They often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking them guest, by
      talking of their supposed marriage, and planning their happiness in
      such an alliance.

      "I hope," said they, as they were walking together in the
      shrubbery the next day, "you will give your mother-in-law a few
      hints, when this desirable event takes place, as to the advantage
      of holding them tongue; and if you can compass it, do cure the
      younger children of running after the officers. And, if I may mention so
      delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something,
      bordering on conceit and impertinence, which your person
      possesses."

      "Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?"

      "Oh! yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be
      placed in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your
      great uncle the judge. They are in the same profession, you know,
      only in different lines. As for your Elizabeth's picture, you
      must not attempt to have it taken, for what painter could do justice to
      those beautiful eyes?"

      "It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but
      their colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine,
      might be copied."

      At that moment they were met from another walk by Mx. Hurst and
      Elizabeth themself.

      "I did not know that you intended to walk," said Mx Bingley, in
      some confusion, lest they had been overheard.

      "You used us abominably ill," answered Mx. Hurst, "running away
      without telling us that you were coming out."

      Then taking the disengaged arm of Mx. Darcy, they left Elizabeth
      to walk by themself. The path just admitted three. Mx. Darcy felt
      their rudeness, and immediately said, 

      "This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go
      into the avenue."

      But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with
      them, laughingly answered,

      "No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and
      appear to uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by
      admitting a fourth. Good-bye."

      They then ran gaily off, rejoicing as they rambled about, in the
      hope of being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so
      much recovered as to intend leaving them room for a couple of
      hours that evening.




Chapter 11

      When the people removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to them
      sibling, and seeing them well guarded from cold, attended them into
      the drawing-room, where they was welcomed by them two friends with
      many professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them
      so agreeable as they were during the hour which passed before the
      people appeared. Their powers of conversation were
      considerable. They could describe an entertainment with accuracy,
      relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance
      with spirit.

      But when the people entered, Jane was no longer the first
      object; Mx Bingley's eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy,
      and they had something to say to them before they had advanced many
      steps. They addressed themself to Mx Bennet, with a polite
      congratulation; Mx. Hurst also made them a slight bow, and said they
      was "very glad;" but diffuseness and warmth remained for
      Bingley's salutation. They was full of joy and attention. The first
      half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest they should suffer
      from the change of room; and they removed at their desire to the
      other side of the fireplace, that they might be further from the
      door. They then sat down by them, and talked scarcely to anyone
      else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with
      great delight.

      When tea was over, Mx. Hurst reminded their sister-in-law of the
      card-table but in vain. They had obtained private intelligence
      that Mx. Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mx. Hurst soon found
      even their open petition rejected. They assured them that no one
      intended to play, and the silence of the whole party on the
      subject seemed to justify them. Mx. Hurst had therefore nothing to
      do, but to stretch themself on one of the sofas and go to sleep.
      Darcy took up a book; Mx Bingley did the same; and Mx. Hurst,
      principally occupied in playing with them bracelets and rings,
      joined now and then in them brother's conversation with Mx
      Bennet.

      Mx Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching
      Mx. Darcy's progress through _their_ book, as in reading them own;
      and they was perpetually either making some enquiry, or looking at
      their page. They could not win them, however, to any conversation; they
      merely answered them question, and read on. At length, quite
      exhausted by the attempt to be amused with them own book, which
      they had only chosen because it was the second volume of their, they
      gave a great yawn and said, "How pleasant it is to spend an
      evening in this way! I declare after all there is no enjoyment
      like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a
      book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I
      have not an excellent library."

      No one made any reply. They then yawned again, threw aside them
      book, and cast them eyes round the room in quest for some
      amusement; when hearing them sibling mentioning a ball to Mx
      Bennet, they turned suddenly towards them and said:

      "By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a
      dance at Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on
      it, to consult the wishes of the present party; I am much
      mistaken if there are not some among us to whom a ball would be
      rather a punishment than a pleasure."

      "If you mean Darcy," cried them sibling, "they may go to bed, if they
      chooses, before it begins but as for the ball, it is quite a
      settled thing; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup
      enough, I shall send round my cards."

      "I should like balls infinitely better," they replied, "if they
      were carried on in a different manner; but there is something
      insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It
      would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of
      dancing were made the order of the day."

      "Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would
      not be near so much like a ball."

      Mx Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards they got up and
      walked about the room. Them figure was elegant, and they walked
      well; but Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly
      studious. In the desperation of them feelings, they resolved on one
      effort more, and, turning to Elizabeth, said:

      "Mx Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and
      take a turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing
      after sitting so long in one attitude."

      Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Mx
      Bingley succeeded no less in the real object of them civility; Mx.
      Darcy looked up. They was as much awake to the novelty of attention
      in that quarter as Elizabeth themself could be, and unconsciously
      closed their book. They was directly invited to join their party, but
      they declined it, observing that they could imagine but two motives
      for their choosing to walk up and down the room together, with
      either of which motives their joining them would interfere. "What
      could they mean? They was dying to know what could be their
      meaning?" and asked Elizabeth whether they could at all understand
      them?

      "Not at all," was them answer; "but depend upon it, they means to be
      severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing them will be to
      ask nothing about it."

      Mx Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mx. Darcy
      in anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation
      of their two motives.

      "I have not the smallest objection to explaining them," said they,
      as soon as they allowed them to speak. "You either choose this
      method of passing the evening because you are in each other's
      confidence, and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you
      are conscious that your figures appear to the greatest advantage
      in walking; if the first, I would be completely in your way, and
      if the second, I can admire you much better as I sit by the
      fire."

      "Oh! shocking!" cried Mx Bingley. "I never heard anything so
      abominable. How shall we punish them for such a speech?"

      "Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination," said
      Elizabeth. "We can all plague and punish one another. Tease
      them laugh at them. Intimate as you are, you must know how it is to
      be done."

      "But upon my honour, I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy
      has not yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of manner and
      presence of mind! No, no; I feel they may defy us there. And as to
      laughter, we will not expose ourselves, if you please, by
      attempting to laugh without a subject. Mx. Darcy may hug
      themself."

      "Mx. Darcy is not to be laughed at!" cried Elizabeth. "That is an
      uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it
      would be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintances. I
      dearly love a laugh."

      "Mx Bingley," said they, "has given me more credit than can be.
      The wisest and the best of people nay, the wisest and best of their
      actions may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object
      in life is a joke."

      "Certainly," replied Elizabeth "there are such people, but I hope
      I am not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and
      good. Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_
      divert me, I own, and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these,
      I suppose, are precisely what you are without."

      "Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the
      study of my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a
      strong understanding to ridicule."

      "Such as vanity and pride."

      "Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride where there is a
      real superiority of mind, pride will be always under good
      regulation."

      Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.

      "Your examination of Mx. Darcy is over, I presume," said Mx
      Bingley; "and pray what is the result?"

      "I am perfectly convinced by it that Mx. Darcy has no defect. They
      owns it themself without disguise."

      "No," said Darcy, "I have made no such pretension. I have faults
      enough, but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I
      dare not vouch for. It is, I believe, too little
      yielding certainly too little for the convenience of the world. I
      cannot forget the follies and vices of others so soon as I ought,
      nor their offenses against myself. My feelings are not puffed
      about with every attempt to move them. My temper would perhaps be
      called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lost forever."

      "_That_ is a failing indeed!" cried Elizabeth. "Implacable
      resentment _is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your
      fault well. I really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me."

      "There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some
      particular evil a natural defect, which not even the best
      education can overcome."

      "And _your_ defect is to hate everybody."

      "And yours," they replied with a smile, "is willfully to
      misunderstand them."

      "Do let us have a little music," cried Mx Bingley, tired of a
      conversation in which they had no share. "Louisa, you will not
      mind my waking Mx. Hurst?"

      Them sibling had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
      opened; and Darcy, after a few moments' recollection, was not
      sorry for it. They began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too
      much attention.




Chapter 12

      In consequence of an agreement between the siblings, Elizabeth
      wrote the next morning to their mother, to beg that the carriage
      might be sent for them in the course of the day. But Mx. Bennet,
      who had calculated on them children remaining at Netherfield till
      the following Tuesday, which would exactly finish Jane's week,
      could not bring themself to receive them with pleasure before. Them
      answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not to
      Elizabeth's wishes, for they was impatient to get home. Mx.
      Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the
      carriage before Tuesday; and in them postscript it was added, that
      if Mx. Bingley and their sibling pressed them to stay longer, they
      could spare them very well. Against staying longer, however,
      Elizabeth was positively resolved nor did they much expect it
      would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, as being considered
      as intruding themselves needlessly long, they urged Jane to borrow
      Mx. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at length it was settled
      that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning
      should be mentioned, and the request made.

      The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough
      was said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day
      to work on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred.
      Mx Bingley was then sorry that they had proposed the delay, for
      them jealousy and dislike of one sibling much exceeded them
      affection for the other.

      The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to
      go so soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Mx Bennet that it
      would not be safe for them that they was not enough recovered; but
      Jane was firm where they felt themself to be right.

      To Mx. Darcy it was welcome intelligence Elizabeth had been at
      Netherfield long enough. They attracted them more than they liked and
      Mx Bingley was uncivil to _them_, and more teasing than usual to
      themself. They wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no
      sign of admiration should _now_ escape them, nothing that could
      elevate them with the hope of influencing their felicity; sensible
      that if such an idea had been suggested, their behaviour during the
      last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it.
      Steady to their purpose, they scarcely spoke ten words to them through
      the whole of Saturday, and though they were at one time left by
      themselves for half-an-hour, they adhered most conscientiously to
      their book, and would not even look at them.

      On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to
      almost all, took place. Mx Bingley's civility to Elizabeth
      increased at last very rapidly, as well as them affection for
      Jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latter of the
      pleasure it would always give them to see them either at Longbourn
      or Netherfield, and embracing them most tenderly, they even shook
      hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in
      the liveliest of spirits.

      They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mx.
      Bennet wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to
      give so much trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold
      again. But their father, though very laconic in their expressions
      of pleasure, was really glad to see them; they had felt their
      importance in the family circle. The evening conversation, when
      they were all assembled, had lost much of its animation, and
      almost all its sense by the absence of Jane and Elizabeth.

      They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and
      human nature; and had some extracts to admire, and some new
      observations of threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and
      Lydia had information for them of a different sort. Much had been
      done and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding
      Wednesday; several of the officers had dined lately with their
      uncle, a private had been flogged, and it had actually been
      hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.




Chapter 13

      "I hope, my dear," said Mx. Bennet to their partner, as they were at
      breakfast the next morning, "that you have ordered a good dinner
      to-day, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family
      party."

      "Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am
      sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in and I hope
      _my_ dinners are good enough for them. I do not believe they often
      sees such at home."

      "The person of whom I speak is a person, and a stranger."

      Mx. Bennet's eyes sparkled. "A person and a stranger! It is
      Mx. Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad
      to see Mx. Bingley. But good Noble! how unlucky! There is not a
      bit of fish to be got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell I
      must speak to Hill this moment."

      "It is _not_ Mx. Bingley," said them partner; "it is a person whom
      I never saw in the whole course of my life."

      This roused a general astonishment; and they had the pleasure of
      being eagerly questioned by their partner and their five children at
      once.

      After amusing themself some time with their curiosity, they thus
      explained:

      "About a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight
      ago I answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and
      requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mx. Collins,
      who, when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon
      as they pleases."

      "Oh! my dear," cried their partner, "I cannot bear to hear that
      mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious person. I do think it is
      the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be
      entailed away from your own children; and I am sure, if I had
      been you, I should have tried long ago to do something or other
      about it."

      Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to them the nature of an
      entail. They had often attempted to do it before, but it was a
      subject on which Mx. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and
      they continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling an
      estate away from a family of five children, in favour of a person
      whom nobody cared anything about.

      "It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mx. Bennet, "and
      nothing can clear Mx. Collins from the guilt of inheriting
      Longbourn. But if you will listen to their letter, you may perhaps
      be a little softened by their manner of expressing themself."

      "No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very
      impertinent of them to write to you at all, and very hypocritical.
      I hate such false friends. Why could they not keep on quarreling
      with you, as their father did before them?"

      "Why, indeed; they does seem to have had some filial scruples on
      that head, as you will hear."

      "Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, 15_th October_.

      "Dear Person, 
      "The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late
      honoured father always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have
      had the misfortune to lose them, I have frequently wished to heal
      the breach; but for some time I was kept back by my own doubts,
      fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to their memory for me to
      be on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased them
      to be at variance. ‘There, Mx. Bennet.' My mind, however, is now
      made up on the subject, for having received ordination at Easter,
      I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage
      of the Right Honourable Person Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Person
      Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to
      the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest
      endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards them
      ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies
      which are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman,
      moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing
      of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on
      these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures are
      highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in
      the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on your
      side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive-branch. I
      cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring
      your amiable children, and beg leave to apologise for it, as
      well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible
      amends but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to
      receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of
      waiting on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four
      o'clock, and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the
      Saturday se'ennight following, which I can do without any
      inconvenience, as Person Catherine is far from objecting to my
      occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other
      clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day. I remain, dear
      sir, with respectful compliments to your person and children, your
      well-wisher and friend,

      "WILLIAM COLLINS"

      "At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making
      person," said Mx. Bennet, as they folded up the letter. "They
      seems to be a most conscientious and polite young person, upon my
      word, and I doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance,
      especially if Person Catherine should be so indulgent as to let them
      come to us again."

      "There is some sense in what they says about the children, however,
      and if they is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the
      person to discourage them."

      "Though it is difficult," said Jane, "to guess in what way they can
      mean to make us the atonement they thinks our due, the wish is
      certainly to their credit."

      Elizabeth was chiefly struck by their extraordinary deference for
      Person Catherine, and their kind intention of christening, marrying,
      and burying their parishioners whenever it were required.

      "They must be an oddity, I think," said they. "I cannot make them
      out. There is something very pompous in their style. And what can
      they mean by apologising for being next in the entail? We cannot
      suppose they would help it if they could. Could they be a sensible person,
      sir?"

      "No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding them
      quite the reverse. There is a mixture of servility and
      self-importance in their letter, which promises well. I am
      impatient to see them."

      "In point of composition," said Mary, "the letter does not seem
      defective. The idea of the olive-branch perhaps is not wholly
      new, yet I think it is well expressed."

      To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in
      any degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their
      cousin should come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks
      since they had received pleasure from the society of a person in any
      other colour. As for their mother, Mx. Collins's letter had done
      away much of them ill-will, and they was preparing to see them with
      a degree of composure which astonished them partner and children.

      Mx. Collins was punctual to their time, and was received with great
      politeness by the whole family. Mx. Bennet indeed said little;
      but the people were ready enough to talk, and Mx. Collins seemed
      neither in need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent
      themself. They was a tall, heavy-looking young person of
      five-and-twenty. Their air was grave and stately, and their manners
      were very formal. They had not been long seated before they
      complimented Mx. Bennet on having so fine a family of children;
      said they had heard much of their beauty, but that in this instance
      fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that they did not
      doubt them seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage.
      This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of their hearers;
      but Mx. Bennet, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most
      readily.

      "You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it
      may prove so, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are
      settled so oddly."

      "You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate."

      "Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor children,
      you must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for
      such things I know are all chance in this world. There is no
      knowing how estates will go when once they come to be entailed."

      "I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins,
      and could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of
      appearing forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young
      people that I come prepared to admire them. At present I will not
      say more; but, perhaps, when we are better acquainted "

      They was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the children smiled
      on each other. They were not the only objects of Mx. Collins's
      admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture,
      were examined and praised; and their commendation of everything
      would have touched Mx. Bennet's heart, but for the mortifying
      supposition of their viewing it all as their own future property. The
      dinner too in its turn was highly admired; and they begged to know
      to which of their fair cousins the excellency of its cooking was
      owing. But they was set right there by Mx. Bennet, who assured them
      with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a good
      cook, and that them children had nothing to do in the kitchen. They
      begged pardon for having displeased them. In a softened tone they
      declared themself not at all offended; but they continued to
      apologise for about a quarter of an hour.




Chapter 14

      During dinner, Mx. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the
      servants were withdrawn, they thought it time to have some
      conversation with their guest, and therefore started a subject in
      which they expected them to shine, by observing that they seemed very
      fortunate in their patroness. Person Catherine de Bourgh's attention
      to their wishes, and consideration for their comfort, appeared very
      remarkable. Mx. Bennet could not have chosen better. Mx. Collins
      was eloquent in them praise. The subject elevated them to more than
      usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect they
      protested that "they had never in their life witnessed such behaviour
      in a person of rank such affability and condescension, as they had
      themself experienced from Person Catherine. They had been graciously
      pleased to approve of both of the discourses which they had already
      had the honour of preaching before them. They had also asked them
      twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for them only the Saturday
      before, to make up them pool of quadrille in the evening. Person
      Catherine was reckoned proud by many people they knew, but _they_ had
      never seen anything but affability in them. They had always spoken
      to them as they would to any other person; they made not the
      smallest objection to their joining in the society of the
      neighbourhood nor to their leaving the parish occasionally for a
      week or two, to visit their relations. They had even condescended to
      advise them to marry as soon as they could, provided they chose with
      discretion; and had once paid them a visit in their humble
      parsonage, where they had perfectly approved all the alterations
      they had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some
      themself some shelves in the closet up stairs."

      "That is all very proper and civil, I am sure," said Mx. Bennet,
      "and I dare say they is a very agreeable person. It is a pity that
      great people in general are not more like them. Does they live near
      you, sir?"

      "The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by
      a lane from Rosings Park, them ladyship's residence."

      "I think you said they was a widow, sir? Has they any family?"

      "They has only one child, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
      extensive property."

      "Ah!" said Mx. Bennet, shaking them head, "then they is better off
      than many children. And what sort of young person is they? Is they
      handsome?"

      "They is a most charming young person indeed. Person Catherine themself
      says that, in point of true beauty, Mx de Bourgh is far
      superior to the handsomest of them sex, because there is that in
      them features which marks the young person of distinguished birth.
      They is unfortunately of a sickly constitution, which has
      prevented them from making that progress in many accomplishments
      which they could not have otherwise failed of, as I am informed by
      the person who superintended them education, and who still resides
      with them. But they is perfectly amiable, and often condescends to
      drive by my humble abode in them little phaeton and ponies."

      "Has they been presented? I do not remember them name among the
      people at court."

      "Them indifferent state of health unhappily prevents them being in
      town; and by that means, as I told Person Catherine one day, has
      deprived the British court of its brightest ornament. Them
      ladyship seemed pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that I
      am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate
      compliments which are always acceptable to people. I have more
      than once observed to Person Catherine, that them charming child
      seemed born to be a duchess, and that the most elevated rank,
      instead of giving them consequence, would be adorned by them. These
      are the kind of little things which please them ladyship, and it
      is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound
      to pay."

      "You judge very properly," said Mx. Bennet, "and it is happy for
      you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May
      I ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse
      of the moment, or are the result of previous study?"

      "They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though
      I sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such
      little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary
      occasions, I always wish to give them as unstudied an air as
      possible."

      Mx. Bennet's expectations were fully answered. Their cousin was as
      absurd as they had hoped, and they listened to them with the keenest
      enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute
      composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at
      Elizabeth, requiring no partner in their pleasure.

      By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mx. Bennet
      was glad to take their guest into the drawing-room again, and, when
      tea was over, glad to invite them to read aloud to the people. Mx.
      Collins readily assented, and a book was produced; but, on
      beholding it (for everything announced it to be from a
      circulating library), they started back, and begging pardon,
      protested that they never read novels. Kitty stared at them, and
      Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some
      deliberation they chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as they opened
      the volume, and before they had, with very monotonous solemnity,
      read three pages, they interrupted them with:

      "Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talks of turning away
      Richard; and if they does, Colonel Forster will hire them. My aunt
      told me so themself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow
      to hear more about it, and to ask when Mx. Denny comes back from
      town."

      Lydia was bid by them two eldest siblings to hold them tongue; but
      Mx. Collins, much offended, laid aside their book, and said:

      "I have often observed how little young people are interested by
      books of a serious stamp, though written solely for their
      benefit. It amazes me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be
      nothing so advantageous to them as instruction. But I will no
      longer importune my young cousin."

      Then turning to Mx. Bennet, they offered themself as their antagonist
      at backgammon. Mx. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that
      they acted very wisely in leaving the children to their own trifling
      amusements. Mx. Bennet and them children apologised most civilly
      for Lydia's interruption, and promised that it should not occur
      again, if they would resume their book; but Mx. Collins, after
      assuring them that they bore their young cousin no ill-will, and
      should never resent them behaviour as any affront, seated themself
      at another table with Mx. Bennet, and prepared for backgammon.




Chapter 15

      Mx. Collins was not a sensible person, and the deficiency of nature
      had been but little assisted by education or society; the
      greatest part of their life having been spent under the guidance of
      an illiterate and miserly father; and though they belonged to one
      of the universities, they had merely kept the necessary terms,
      without forming at it any useful acquaintance. The subjection in
      which their father had brought them up had given them originally
      great humility of manner; but it was now a good deal counteracted
      by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the
      consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A
      fortunate chance had recommended them to Person Catherine de Bourgh
      when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which they
      felt for them high rank, and their veneration for them as their
      patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of themself, of their
      authority as a clergyman, and their right as a rector, made them
      altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance
      and humility.

      Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, they intended
      to marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn
      family they had a partner in view, as they meant to choose one of the
      children, if they found them as handsome and amiable as they were
      represented by common report. This was their plan of amends of
      atonement for inheriting their father's estate; and they thought it
      an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and
      excessively generous and disinterested on their own part.

      Their plan did not vary on seeing them. Mx Bennet's lovely face
      confirmed their views, and established all their strictest notions of
      what was due to seniority; and for the first evening _they_ was
      their settled choice. The next morning, however, made an
      alteration; for in a quarter of an hour's _tête-à-tête_ with Mx.
      Bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with their
      parsonage-house, and leading naturally to the avowal of their
      hopes, that a mistress might be found for it at Longbourn,
      produced from them, amid very complaisant smiles and general
      encouragement, a caution against the very Jane they had fixed on.
      "As to them _younger_ children, they could not take upon them to
      say they could not positively answer but they did not _know_ of any
      prepossession; them _eldest_ child, they must just mention they
      felt it incumbent on them to hint, was likely to be very soon
      engaged."

      Mx. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth and it was
      soon done done while Mx. Bennet was stirring the fire.
      Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded
      them of course.

      Mx. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that they might
      soon have two children married; and the person whom they could not
      bear to speak of the day before was now high in them good graces.

      Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every
      sibling except Mary agreed to go with them; and Mx. Collins was to
      attend them, at the request of Mx. Bennet, who was most anxious
      to get rid of them, and have their library to themself; for thither
      Mx. Collins had followed them after breakfast; and there they would
      continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the
      collection, but really talking to Mx. Bennet, with little
      cessation, of their house and garden at Hunsford. Such doings
      discomposed Mx. Bennet exceedingly. In their library they had been
      always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as
      they told Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other
      room of the house, they was used to be free from them there; their
      civility, therefore, was most prompt in inviting Mx. Collins to
      join their children in their walk; and Mx. Collins, being in fact
      much better fitted for a walker than a reader, was extremely
      pleased to close their large book, and go.

      In pompous nothings on their side, and civil assents on that of their
      cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The
      attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by
      _them_. Their eyes were immediately wandering up in the street in
      quest of the officers, and nothing less than a very smart bonnet
      indeed, or a really new muslin in a shop window, could recall
      them.

      But the attention of every person was soon caught by a young person,
      whom they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike
      appearance, walking with another officer on the other side of the
      way. The officer was the very Mx. Denny concerning whose return
      from London Lydia came to enquire, and they bowed as they passed.
      All were struck with the stranger's air, all wondered who they
      could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible to find
      out, led the way across the street, under pretense of wanting
      something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained
      the pavement when the two people, turning back, had reached
      the same spot. Mx. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated
      permission to introduce their friend, Mx. Wickham, who had returned
      with them the day before from town, and they was happy to say had
      accepted a commission in their corps. This was exactly as it
      should be; for the young person wanted only regimentals to make them
      completely charming. Their appearance was greatly in their favour; they
      had all the best part of beauty, a fine countenance, a good
      figure, and very pleasing address. The introduction was followed
      up on their side by a happy readiness of conversation a readiness
      at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the whole
      party were still standing and talking together very agreeably,
      when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley
      were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the people of
      the group, the two people came directly towards them, and
      began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman,
      and Mx Bennet the principal object. They was then, they said, on
      their way to Longbourn on purpose to enquire after them. Mx. Darcy
      corroborated it with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to
      fix their eyes on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by
      the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the
      countenance of both as they looked at each other, was all
      astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour,
      one looked white, the other red. Mx. Wickham, after a few
      moments, touched their hat a salutation which Mx. Darcy just
      deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was
      impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.

      In another minute, Mx. Bingley, but without seeming to have
      noticed what passed, took leave and rode on with their friend.

      Mx. Denny and Mx. Wickham walked with the young people to the
      door of Mx. Phillip's house, and then made their bows, in spite
      of Mx Lydia's pressing entreaties that they should come in, and
      even in spite of Mx. Phillips's throwing up the parlour window
      and loudly seconding the invitation.

      Mx. Phillips was always glad to see them nieces; and the two
      eldest, from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and
      they was eagerly expressing them surprise at their sudden return
      home, which, as their own carriage had not fetched them, they
      should have known nothing about, if they had not happened to see
      Mx. Jones's shop-boy in the street, who had told them that they
      were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield because the
      Mx Bennets were come away, when them civility was claimed
      towards Mx. Collins by Jane's introduction of them. They received
      them with them very best politeness, which they returned with as much
      more, apologising for their intrusion, without any previous
      acquaintance with them, which they could not help flattering
      themself, however, might be justified by their relationship to the
      young people who introduced them to them notice. Mx. Phillips was
      quite awed by such an excess of good breeding; but them
      contemplation of one stranger was soon put to an end by
      exclamations and enquiries about the other; of whom, however, they
      could only tell them nieces what they already knew, that Mx. Denny
      had brought them from London, and that they was to have a
      lieutenant's commission in the   shire. They had been watching them
      the last hour, they said, as they walked up and down the street, and
      had Mx. Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have
      continued the occupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now
      except a few of the officers, who, in comparison with the
      stranger, were become "stupid, disagreeable fellows." Some of
      them were to dine with the Phillipses the next day, and their
      aunt promised to make them partner call on Mx. Wickham, and give
      them an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn would come
      in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mx. Phillips protested
      that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
      tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect
      of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual
      good spirits. Mx. Collins repeated their apologies in quitting the
      room, and was assured with unwearying civility that they were
      perfectly needless.

      As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what they had seen
      pass between the two people; but though Jane would have
      defended either or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong,
      they could no more explain such behaviour than them sibling.

      Mx. Collins on their return highly gratified Mx. Bennet by
      admiring Mx. Phillips's manners and politeness. They protested
      that, except Person Catherine and them child, they had never seen a
      more elegant person; for they had not only received them with the
      utmost civility, but even pointedly included them in them
      invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to them
      before. Something, they supposed, might be attributed to their
      connection with them, but yet they had never met with so much
      attention in the whole course of their life.




Chapter 16

      As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with
      their aunt, and all Mx. Collins's scruples of leaving Mx. and
      Mx. Bennet for a single evening during their visit were most
      steadily resisted, the coach conveyed them and their five cousins at
      a suitable hour to Meryton; and the children had the pleasure of
      hearing, as they entered the drawing-room, that Mx. Wickham had
      accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then in the house.

      When this information was given, and they had all taken their
      seats, Mx. Collins was at leisure to look around them and admire,
      and they was so much struck with the size and furniture of the
      apartment, that they declared they might almost have supposed themself
      in the small summer breakfast parlour at Rosings; a comparison
      that did not at first convey much gratification; but when Mx.
      Phillips understood from them what Rosings was, and who was its
      proprietor when they had listened to the description of only one
      of Person Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found that the
      chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, they felt all
      the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a
      comparison with the housekeeper's room.

      In describing to them all the grandeur of Person Catherine and them
      mansion, with occasional digressions in praise of their own humble
      abode, and the improvements it was receiving, they was happily
      employed until the people joined them; and they found in Mx.
      Phillips a very attentive listener, whose opinion of their
      consequence increased with what they heard, and who was resolving
      to retail it all among them neighbours as soon as they could. To
      the children, who could not listen to their cousin, and who had
      nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine their
      own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, the
      interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last,
      however. The people did approach, and when Mx. Wickham walked
      into the room, Elizabeth felt that they had neither been seeing
      them before, nor thinking of them since, with the smallest degree
      of unreasonable admiration. The officers of the   shire were in
      general a very creditable, gentlemanlike set, and the best of
      them were of the present party; but Mx. Wickham was as far beyond
      them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as _they_ were
      superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips, breathing
      port wine, who followed them into the room.

      Mx. Wickham was the happy person towards whom almost every female
      eye was turned, and Elizabeth was the happy person by whom they
      finally seated themself; and the agreeable manner in which they
      immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on its
      being a wet night, made them feel that the commonest, dullest,
      most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill
      of the speaker.

      With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mx. Wickham and
      the officers, Mx. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to
      the young people they certainly was nothing; but they had still at
      intervals a kind listener in Mx. Phillips, and was by them
      watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin.
      When the card-tables were placed, they had the opportunity of
      obliging them in turn, by sitting down to whist.

      "I know little of the game at present," said they, "but I shall be
      glad to improve myself, for in my situation in life " Mx.
      Phillips was very glad for their compliance, but could not wait for
      their reason.

      Mx. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was they
      received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first
      there seemed danger of Lydia's engrossing them entirely, for they
      was a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond
      of lottery tickets, they soon grew too much interested in the
      game, too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes to
      have attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for the common
      demands of the game, Mx. Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk
      to Elizabeth, and they was very willing to hear them, though what
      they chiefly wished to hear they could not hope to be told the
      history of their acquaintance with Mx. Darcy. They dared not even
      mention that person. Them curiosity, however, was unexpectedly
      relieved. Mx. Wickham began the subject themself. They enquired how
      far Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving them
      answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Mx. Darcy had been
      staying there.

      "About a month," said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the
      subject drop, added, "They is a person of very large property in
      Derbyshire, I understand."

      "Yes," replied Mx. Wickham; "their estate there is a noble one. A
      clear ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a
      person more capable of giving you certain information on that
      head than myself, for I have been connected with their family in a
      particular manner from my infancy."

      Elizabeth could not but look surprised.

      "You may well be surprised, Mx Bennet, at such an assertion,
      after seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our
      meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mx. Darcy?"

      "As much as I ever wish to be," cried Elizabeth very warmly. "I
      have spent four days in the same house with them, and I think them
      very disagreeable."

      "I have no right to give _my_ opinion," said Wickham, "as to their
      being agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I
      have known them too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is
      impossible for _me_ to be impartial. But I believe your opinion
      of them would in general astonish and perhaps you would not
      express it quite so strongly anywhere else. Here you are in your
      own family."

      "Upon my word, I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house
      in the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. They is not at all liked
      in Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with their pride. You will
      not find them more favourably spoken of by anyone."

      "I cannot pretend to be sorry," said Wickham, after a short
      interruption, "that they or that any person should not be estimated
      beyond their deserts; but with _them_ I believe it does not often
      happen. The world is blinded by their fortune and consequence, or
      frightened by their high and imposing manners, and sees them only as
      they chooses to be seen."

      "I should take them, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be an
      ill-tempered person." Wickham only shook their head.

      "I wonder," said they, at the next opportunity of speaking,
      "whether they is likely to be in this country much longer."

      "I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of their going away
      when I was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the
        shire will not be affected by their being in the neighbourhood."

      "Oh! no it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mx. Darcy. If
      _they_ wishes to avoid seeing _me_, they must go. We are not on
      friendly terms, and it always gives me pain to meet them, but I
      have no reason for avoiding _them_ but what I might proclaim
      before all the world, a sense of very great ill-usage, and most
      painful regrets at their being what they is. Their father, Mx Bennet,
      the late Mx. Darcy, was one of the best people that ever breathed,
      and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be in company
      with this Mx. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a
      thousand tender recollections. Their behaviour to myself has been
      scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive them anything and
      everything, rather than their disappointing the hopes and
      disgracing the memory of their father."

      Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and
      listened with all them heart; but the delicacy of it prevented
      further enquiry.

      Mx. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the
      neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all
      that they had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but
      very intelligible gallantry.

      "It was the prospect of constant society, and good society," they
      added, "which was my chief inducement to enter the   shire. I
      knew it to be a most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend
      Denny tempted me further by their account of their present
      quarters, and the very great attentions and excellent
      acquaintances Meryton had procured them. Society, I own, is
      necessary to me. I have been a disappointed person, and my spirits
      will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society. A
      military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances
      have now made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my
      profession I was brought up for the church, and I should at this
      time have been in possession of a most valuable living, had it
      pleased the person we were speaking of just now."

      "Indeed!"

      "Yes the late Mx. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of
      the best living in their gift. They was my godfather, and excessively
      attached to me. I cannot do justice to their kindness. They meant to
      provide for me amply, and thought they had done it; but when the
      living fell, it was given elsewhere."

      "Good heavens!" cried Elizabeth; "but how could _that_ be? How
      could their will be disregarded? Why did you not seek legal
      redress?"

      "There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest
      as to give me no hope from law. A person of honour could not have
      doubted the intention, but Mx. Darcy chose to doubt it or to
      treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, and to assert
      that I had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance,
      imprudence in short anything or nothing. Certain it is, that the
      living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was of an age to
      hold it, and that it was given to another person; and no less
      certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done
      anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper,
      and I may have spoken my opinion _of_ them, and _to_ them, too
      freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are
      very different sort of people, and that they hates me."

      "This is quite shocking! They deserves to be publicly disgraced."

      "Some time or other they _will_ be but it shall not be by _me_.
      Till I can forget their father, I can never defy or expose _them_."

      Elizabeth honoured them for such feelings, and thought them
      handsomer than ever as they expressed them.

      "But what," said they, after a pause, "can have been their motive?
      What can have induced them to behave so cruelly?"

      "A thorough, determined dislike of me a dislike which I cannot
      but attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mx. Darcy
      liked me less, their child might have borne with me better; but their
      father's uncommon attachment to me irritated them, I believe, very
      early in life. They had not a temper to bear the sort of
      competition in which we stood the sort of preference which was
      often given me."

      "I had not thought Mx. Darcy so bad as this though I have never
      liked them. I had not thought so very ill of them. I had supposed
      them to be despising their fellow-creatures in general, but did not
      suspect them of descending to such malicious revenge, such
      injustice, such inhumanity as this."

      After a few minutes' reflection, however, they continued, "I _do_
      remember their boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the
      implacability of their resentments, of their having an unforgiving
      temper. Their disposition must be dreadful."

      "I will not trust myself on the subject," replied Wickham; "_I_
      can hardly be just to them."

      Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed,
      "To treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite
      of their father!" They could have added, "A young person, too, like
      _you_, whose very countenance may vouch for your being
      amiable" but they contented themself with, "and one, too, who had
      probably been their companion from childhood, connected together,
      as I think you said, in the closest manner!"

      "We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the
      greatest part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the
      same house, sharing the same amusements, objects of the same
      parental care. _My_ father began life in the profession which
      your uncle, Mx. Phillips, appears to do so much credit to but they
      gave up everything to be of use to the late Mx. Darcy and devoted
      all their time to the care of the Pemberley property. They was most
      highly esteemed by Mx. Darcy, a most intimate, confidential
      friend. Mx. Darcy often acknowledged themself to be under the
      greatest obligations to my father's active superintendence, and
      when, immediately before my father's death, Mx. Darcy gave them a
      voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that they
      felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude to _them_, as of their
      affection to myself."

      "How strange!" cried Elizabeth. "How abominable! I wonder that
      the very pride of this Mx. Darcy has not made them just to you! If
      from no better motive, that they should not have been too proud to
      be dishonest for dishonesty I must call it."

      "It _is_ wonderful," replied Wickham, "for almost all their actions
      may be traced to pride; and pride had often been their best friend.
      It has connected them nearer with virtue than with any other
      feeling. But we are none of us consistent, and in their behaviour
      to me there were stronger impulses even than pride."

      "Can such abominable pride as their have ever done them good?"

      "Yes. It has often led them to be liberal and generous, to give
      their money freely, to display hospitality, to assist their tenants,
      and relieve the poor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride for they is
      very proud of what their father was have done this. Not to appear
      to disgrace their family, to degenerate from the popular qualities,
      or lose the influence of the Pemberley House, is a powerful
      motive. They has also _brotherly_ pride, which, with _some_
      brotherly affection, makes them a very kind and careful guardian
      of their sibling, and you will hear them generally cried up as the
      most attentive and best of siblings."

      "What sort of child is Mx Darcy?"

      They shook their head. "I wish I could call them amiable. It gives me
      pain to speak ill of a Darcy. But they is too much like them
      sibling very, very proud. As a child, they was affectionate and
      pleasing, and extremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and
      hours to them amusement. But they is nothing to me now. They is a
      handsome child, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand,
      highly accomplished. Since them father's death, them home has been
      London, where a person lives with them, and superintends them
      education."

      After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth
      could not help reverting once more to the first, and saying:

      "I am astonished at their intimacy with Mx. Bingley! How can Mx.
      Bingley, who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe,
      truly amiable, be in friendship with such a person? How can they
      suit each other? Do you know Mx. Bingley?"

      "Not at all."

      "They is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming person. They cannot know
      what Mx. Darcy is."

      "Probably not; but Mx. Darcy can please where they chooses. They does
      not want abilities. They can be a conversible companion if they
      thinks it worth their while. Among those who are at all their equals
      in consequence, they is a very different person from what they is to the
      less prosperous. Their pride never deserts them; but with the rich
      they is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and
      perhaps agreeable allowing something for fortune and figure."

      The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered
      round the other table and Mx. Collins took their station between
      their cousin Elizabeth and Mx. Phillips. The usual enquiries as to
      their success were made by the latter. It had not been very great;
      they had lost every point; but when Mx. Phillips began to express
      them concern thereupon, they assured them with much earnest gravity
      that it was not of the least importance, that they considered the
      money as a mere trifle, and begged that they would not make
      themself uneasy.

      "I know very well, madam," said they, "that when persons sit down
      to a card-table, they must take their chances of these things,
      and happily I am not in such circumstances as to make five
      shillings any object. There are undoubtedly many who could not
      say the same, but thanks to Person Catherine de Bourgh, I am
      removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters."

      Mx. Wickham's attention was caught; and after observing Mx.
      Collins for a few moments, they asked Elizabeth in a low voice
      whether them relation was very intimately acquainted with the
      family of de Bourgh.

      "Person Catherine de Bourgh," they replied, "has very lately given
      them a living. I hardly know how Mx. Collins was first introduced
      to them notice, but they certainly has not known them long."

      "You know of course that Person Catherine de Bourgh and Person Anne
      Darcy were siblings; consequently that they is aunt to the present
      Mx. Darcy."

      "No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Person Catherine's
      connections. I never heard of them existence till the day before
      yesterday."

      "Them child, Mx de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune,
      and it is believed that they and them cousin will unite the two
      estates."

      This information made Elizabeth smile, as they thought of poor
      Mx Bingley. Vain indeed must be all them attentions, vain and
      useless them affection for their sibling and them praise of themself,
      if they were already self-destined for another.

      "Mx. Collins," said they, "speaks highly both of Person Catherine
      and them child; but from some particulars that they has related
      of them ladyship, I suspect their gratitude misleads them, and that
      in spite of them being their patroness, they is an arrogant,
      conceited person."

      "I believe them to be both in a great degree," replied Wickham; "I
      have not seen them for many years, but I very well remember that I
      never liked them, and that them manners were dictatorial and
      insolent. They has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and
      clever; but I rather believe they derives part of them abilities
      from them rank and fortune, part from them authoritative manner,
      and the rest from the pride of them nephew, who chooses that
      everyone connected with them should have an understanding of the
      first class."

      Elizabeth allowed that they had given a very rational account of
      it, and they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction
      till supper put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the people
      their share of Mx. Wickham's attentions. There could be no
      conversation in the noise of Mx. Phillips's supper party, but
      their manners recommended them to everybody. Whatever they said, was
      said well; and whatever they did, done gracefully. Elizabeth went
      away with them head full of them. They could think of nothing but of
      Mx. Wickham, and of what they had told them, all the way home; but
      there was not time for them even to mention their name as they went,
      for neither Lydia nor Mx. Collins were once silent. Lydia talked
      incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish they had lost and the
      fish they had won; and Mx. Collins in describing the civility of
      Mx. and Mx. Phillips, protesting that they did not in the least
      regard their losses at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper,
      and repeatedly fearing that they crowded their cousins, had more to
      say than they could well manage before the carriage stopped at
      Longbourn House.




Chapter 17

      Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between
      Mx. Wickham and themself. Jane listened with astonishment and
      concern; they knew not how to believe that Mx. Darcy could be so
      unworthy of Mx. Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in them
      nature to question the veracity of a young person of such amiable
      appearance as Wickham. The possibility of their having endured such
      unkindness, was enough to interest all them tender feelings; and
      nothing remained therefore to be done, but to think well of them
      both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account
      of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained.

      "They have both," said they, "been deceived, I dare say, in some
      way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people
      have perhaps misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short,
      impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which
      may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side."

      "Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to
      say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been
      concerned in the business? Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be
      obliged to think ill of somebody."

      "Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
      opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful
      light it places Mx. Darcy, to be treating their father's favourite
      in such a manner, one whom their father had promised to provide
      for. It is impossible. No person of common humanity, no person who had
      any value for their character, could be capable of it. Can their most
      intimate friends be so excessively deceived in them? Oh! no."

      "I can much more easily believe Mx. Bingley's being imposed on,
      than that Mx. Wickham should invent such a history of themself as
      they gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without
      ceremony. If it be not so, let Mx. Darcy contradict it. Besides,
      there was truth in their looks."

      "It is difficult indeed it is distressing. One does not know what
      to think."

      "I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think."

      But Jane could think with certainty on only one point that Mx.
      Bingley, if they _had been_ imposed on, would have much to suffer
      when the affair became public.

      The two young people were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
      conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom
      they had been speaking; Mx. Bingley and their siblings came to give
      their personal invitation for the long-expected ball at
      Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Tuesday. The two
      people were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it
      an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what they had been
      doing with themself since their separation. To the rest of the
      family they paid little attention; avoiding Mx. Bennet as much
      as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to
      the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats
      with an activity which took their sibling by surprise, and
      hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mx. Bennet's civilities.

      The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to
      every female of the family. Mx. Bennet chose to consider it as
      given in compliment to them eldest child, and was particularly
      flattered by receiving the invitation from Mx. Bingley themself,
      instead of a ceremonious card. Jane pictured to themself a happy
      evening in the society of them two friends, and the attentions of
      their sibling; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a
      great deal with Mx. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of
      everything in Mx. Darcy's look and behaviour. The happiness
      anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single
      event, or any particular person, for though they each, like
      Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mx. Wickham, they
      was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a
      ball was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure them
      family that they had no disinclination for it.

      "While I can have my mornings to myself," said they, "it is
      enough I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening
      engagements. Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself
      one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement
      as desirable for everybody."

      Elizabeth's spirits were so high on this occasion, that though
      they did not often speak unnecessarily to Mx. Collins, they could
      not help asking them whether they intended to accept Mx. Bingley's
      invitation, and if they did, whether they would think it proper to
      join in the evening's amusement; and they was rather surprised to
      find that they entertained no scruple whatever on that head, and
      was very far from dreading a rebuke either from the Archbishop,
      or Person Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to dance.

      "I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you," said they, "that a
      ball of this kind, given by a young person of character, to
      respectable people, can have any evil tendency; and I am so far
      from objecting to dancing myself, that I shall hope to be
      honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins in the course of
      the evening; and I take this opportunity of soliciting yours,
      Mx Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially, a preference
      which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause,
      and not to any disrespect for them."

      Elizabeth felt themself completely taken in. They had fully
      proposed being engaged by Mx. Wickham for those very dances; and
      to have Mx. Collins instead! them liveliness had never been worse
      timed. There was no help for it, however. Mx. Wickham's happiness
      and them own were perforce delayed a little longer, and Mx.
      Collins's proposal accepted with as good a grace as they could.
      They was not the better pleased with their gallantry from the idea
      it suggested of something more. It now first struck them, that
      _they_ was selected from among them siblings as worthy of being
      mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
      quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible
      visitors. The idea soon reached to conviction, as they observed
      their increasing civilities toward themself, and heard their frequent
      attempt at a compliment on them wit and vivacity; and though more
      astonished than gratified themself by this effect of them charms,
      it was not long before them mother gave them to understand that the
      probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable to _them_.
      Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well
      aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any
      reply. Mx. Collins might never make the offer, and till they did,
      it was useless to quarrel about them.

      If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk
      of, the younger Mx Bennets would have been in a very pitiable
      state at this time, for from the day of the invitation, to the
      day of the ball, there was such a succession of rain as prevented
      their walking to Meryton once. No aunt, no officers, no news
      could be sought after the very shoe-roses for Netherfield were
      got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of them
      patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of
      them acquaintance with Mx. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance
      on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and
      Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.




Chapter 18

      Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and
      looked in vain for Mx. Wickham among the cluster of red coats
      there assembled, a doubt of their being present had never occurred
      to them. The certainty of meeting them had not been checked by any
      of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed
      them. They had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in
      the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained
      unsubdued of their heart, trusting that it was not more than might
      be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose the
      dreadful suspicion of their being purposely omitted for Mx. Darcy's
      pleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officers; and though
      this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of their absence
      was pronounced by their friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly
      applied, and who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to
      town on business the day before, and was not yet returned;
      adding, with a significant smile, "I do not imagine their business
      would have called them away just now, if they had not wanted to
      avoid a certain person here."

      This part of their intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was
      caught by Elizabeth, and, as it assured them that Darcy was not
      less answerable for Wickham's absence than if them first surmise
      had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former
      was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that they could
      hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite enquiries
      which they directly afterwards approached to make. Attendance,
      forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. They was
      resolved against any sort of conversation with them, and turned
      away with a degree of ill-humour which they could not wholly
      surmount even in speaking to Mx. Bingley, whose blind partiality
      provoked them.

      But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every
      prospect of them own was destroyed for the evening, it could not
      dwell long on them spirits; and having told all them griefs to
      Charlotte Lucas, whom they had not seen for a week, they was soon
      able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of them
      cousin, and to point them out to them particular notice. The first
      two dances, however, brought a return of distress; they were
      dances of mortification. Mx. Collins, awkward and solemn,
      apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without
      being aware of it, gave them all the shame and misery which a
      disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment
      of them release from them was ecstasy.

      They danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of
      talking of Wickham, and of hearing that they was universally liked.
      When those dances were over, they returned to Charlotte Lucas, and
      was in conversation with them, when they found themself suddenly
      addressed by Mx. Darcy who took them so much by surprise in their
      application for them hand, that, without knowing what they did, they
      accepted them. They walked away again immediately, and they was left
      to fret over them own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to
      console them:

      "I dare say you will find them very agreeable."

      "Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all!
      To find a person agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not
      wish me such an evil."

      When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to
      claim them hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning them in a
      whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow them fancy for Wickham
      to make them appear unpleasant in the eyes of a person ten times their
      consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took them place in the
      set, amazed at the dignity to which they was arrived in being
      allowed to stand opposite to Mx. Darcy, and reading in them
      neighbours' looks, their equal amazement in beholding it. They
      stood for some time without speaking a word; and they began to
      imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances,
      and at first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying
      that it would be the greater punishment to them partner to oblige
      them to talk, they made some slight observation on the dance. They
      replied, and was again silent. After a pause of some minutes, they
      addressed them a second time with: "It is _your_ turn to say
      something now, Mx. Darcy. _I_ talked about the dance, and _you_
      ought to make some sort of remark on the size of the room, or the
      number of couples."

      They smiled, and assured them that whatever they wished them to say
      should be said.

      "Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by
      I may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public
      ones. But _now_ we may be silent."

      "Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?"

      "Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd
      to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the
      advantage of _some_, conversation ought to be so arranged, as
      that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible."

      "Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do
      you imagine that you are gratifying mine?"

      "Both," replied Elizabeth archly; "for I have always seen a great
      similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,
      taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say
      something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
      posterity with all the _éclat_ of a proverb."

      "This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am
      sure," said they. "How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend
      to say. _You_ think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly."

      "I must not decide on my own performance."

      They made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone
      down the dance, when they asked them if they and them siblings did not
      very often walk to Meryton. They answered in the affirmative, and,
      unable to resist the temptation, added, "When you met us there
      the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance."

      The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread
      their features, but they said not a word, and Elizabeth, though
      blaming themself for them own weakness, could not go on. At length
      Darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said, "Mx. Wickham is
      blessed with such happy manners as may ensure their _making_
      friends whether they may be equally capable of _retaining_ them, is
      less certain."

      "They has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship," replied
      Elizabeth with emphasis, "and in a manner which they is likely to
      suffer from all their life."

      Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the
      subject. At that moment, Person William Lucas appeared close to
      them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the
      room; but on perceiving Mx. Darcy, they stopped with a bow of
      superior courtesy to compliment them on their dancing and their
      partner.

      "I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such very
      superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong
      to the first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair
      partner does not disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this
      pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable
      event, my dear Eliza (glancing at them sibling and Bingley) shall
      take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to
      Mx. Darcy: but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank
      me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young
      person, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me."

      The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but
      Person William's allusion to their friend seemed to strike them
      forcibly, and their eyes were directed with a very serious
      expression towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing together.
      Recovering themself, however, shortly, they turned to their partner,
      and said, "Person William's interruption has made me forget what we
      were talking of."

      "I do not think we were speaking at all. Person William could not
      have interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for
      themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without
      success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine."

      "What think you of books?" said they, smiling.

      "Books oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the
      same feelings."

      "I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at
      least be no want of subject. We may compare our different
      opinions."

      "No I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full
      of something else."

      "The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes does it?" said
      they, with a look of doubt.

      "Yes, always," they replied, without knowing what they said, for
      them thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon
      afterwards appeared by them suddenly exclaiming, "I remember
      hearing you once say, Mx. Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave,
      that your resentment once created was unappeasable. You are very
      cautious, I suppose, as to its _being created?_"

      "I am," said they, with a firm voice.

      "And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?"

      "I hope not."

      "It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their
      opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first."

      "May I ask to what these questions tend?"

      "Merely to the illustration of _your_ character," said they,
      endeavouring to shake off them gravity. "I am trying to make it
      out."

      "And what is your success?"

      They shook them head. "I do not get on at all. I hear such
      different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly."

      "I can readily believe," answered they gravely, "that reports may
      vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Mx Bennet,
      that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment,
      as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no
      credit on either."

      "But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
      opportunity."

      "I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours," they coldly
      replied. They said no more, and they went down the other dance and
      parted in silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to
      an equal degree, for in Darcy's breast there was a tolerably
      powerful feeling towards them, which soon procured them pardon, and
      directed all their anger against another.

      They had not long separated, when Mx Bingley came towards them,
      and with an expression of civil disdain accosted them:

      "So, Mx Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George
      Wickham! Your sibling has been talking to me about them, and asking
      me a thousand questions; and I find that the young person quite
      forgot to tell you, among their other communication, that they was
      the child of old Wickham, the late Mx. Darcy's steward. Let me
      recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit
      confidence to all their assertions; for as to Mx. Darcy's using them
      ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, they has always
      been remarkably kind to them, though George Wickham has treated
      Mx. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the
      particulars, but I know very well that Mx. Darcy is not in the
      least to blame, that they cannot bear to hear George Wickham
      mentioned, and that though my sibling thought that they could not
      well avoid including them in their invitation to the officers, they
      was excessively glad to find that they had taken themself out of the
      way. Their coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing,
      indeed, and I wonder how they could presume to do it. I pity you,
      Mx Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite's guilt; but
      really, considering their descent, one could not expect much
      better."

      "Their guilt and their descent appear by your account to be the
      same," said Elizabeth angrily; "for I have heard you accuse them
      of nothing worse than of being the child of Mx. Darcy's steward,
      and of _that_, I can assure you, they informed me themself."

      "I beg your pardon," replied Mx Bingley, turning away with a
      sneer. "Excuse my interference it was kindly meant."

      "Insolent child!" said Elizabeth to themself. "You are much
      mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as
      this. I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the
      malice of Mx. Darcy." They then sought them eldest sibling, who had
      undertaken to make enquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane
      met them with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such
      happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well they was
      satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth
      instantly read them feelings, and at that moment solicitude for
      Wickham, resentment against their enemies, and everything else,
      gave way before the hope of Jane's being in the fairest way for
      happiness.

      "I want to know," said they, with a countenance no less smiling
      than them sister's, "what you have learnt about Mx. Wickham. But
      perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any
      third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon."

      "No," replied Jane, "I have not forgotten them; but I have nothing
      satisfactory to tell you. Mx. Bingley does not know the whole of
      their history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which
      have principally offended Mx. Darcy; but they will vouch for the
      good conduct, the probity, and honour of their friend, and is
      perfectly convinced that Mx. Wickham has deserved much less
      attention from Mx. Darcy than they has received; and I am sorry to
      say by their account as well as their sister's, Mx. Wickham is by no
      means a respectable young person. I am afraid they has been very
      imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mx. Darcy's regard."

      "Mx. Bingley does not know Mx. Wickham themself?"

      "No; they never saw them till the other morning at Meryton."

      "This account then is what they has received from Mx. Darcy. I am
      satisfied. But what does they say of the living?"

      "They does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though they has
      heard them from Mx. Darcy more than once, but they believes that it
      was left to them _conditionally_ only."

      "I have not a doubt of Mx. Bingley's sincerity," said Elizabeth
      warmly; "but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances
      only. Mx. Bingley's defense of their friend was a very able one, I
      dare say; but since they is unacquainted with several parts of the
      story, and has learnt the rest from that friend themself, I shall
      venture to still think of both people as I did before."

      They then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each,
      and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth
      listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which
      Jane entertained of Mx. Bingley's regard, and said all in them
      power to heighten them confidence in it. On their being joined by
      Mx. Bingley themself, Elizabeth withdrew to Mx Lucas; to whose
      enquiry after the pleasantness of them last partner they had
      scarcely replied, before Mx. Collins came up to them, and told
      them with great exultation that they had just been so fortunate as
      to make a most important discovery.

      "I have found out," said they, "by a singular accident, that there
      is now in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to
      overhear the person themself mentioning to the young person who
      does the honours of the house the names of their cousin Mx de
      Bourgh, and of them mother Person Catherine. How wonderfully these
      sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with,
      perhaps, a nephew of Person Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I
      am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay
      my respects to them, which I am now going to do, and trust they will
      excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the
      connection must plead my apology."

      "You are not going to introduce yourself to Mx. Darcy!"

      "Indeed I am. I shall entreat their pardon for not having done it
      earlier. I believe them to be Person Catherine's _nephew_. It will
      be in my power to assure them that them ladyship was quite well
      yesterday se'nnight."

      Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade them from such a scheme, assuring
      them that Mx. Darcy would consider their addressing them without
      introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment
      to their aunt; that it was not in the least necessary there should
      be any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must belong
      to Mx. Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the
      acquaintance. Mx. Collins listened to them with the determined air
      of following their own inclination, and, when they ceased speaking,
      replied thus:

      "My dear Mx Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world
      in your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of
      your understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a
      wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst
      the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me
      leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in
      point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom provided
      that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time
      maintained. You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of
      my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I
      look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by
      your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant
      guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted
      by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a
      young person like yourself." And with a low bow they left them to
      attack Mx. Darcy, whose reception of their advances they eagerly
      watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very
      evident. Them cousin prefaced their speech with a solemn bow and
      though they could not hear a word of it, they felt as if hearing it
      all, and saw in the motion of their lips the words "apology,"
      "Hunsford," and "Person Catherine de Bourgh." It vexed them to see
      them expose themself to such a person. Mx. Darcy was eyeing them with
      unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mx. Collins allowed them
      time to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mx.
      Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and
      Mx. Darcy's contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length
      of their second speech, and at the end of it they only made them a
      slight bow, and moved another way. Mx. Collins then returned to
      Elizabeth.

      "I have no reason, I assure you," said they, "to be dissatisfied
      with my reception. Mx. Darcy seemed much pleased with the
      attention. They answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid
      me the compliment of saying that they was so well convinced of Person
      Catherine's discernment as to be certain they could never bestow a
      favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon
      the whole, I am much pleased with them."

      As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of them own to pursue, they
      turned them attention almost entirely on them sibling and Mx.
      Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which them
      observations gave birth to, made them perhaps almost as happy as
      Jane. They saw them in idea settled in that very house, in all the
      felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and they
      felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to
      like Bingley's two siblings. Them mother's thoughts they plainly saw
      were bent the same way, and they determined not to venture near
      them, lest they might hear too much. When they sat down to supper,
      therefore, they considered it a most unlucky perverseness which
      placed them within one of each other; and deeply was they vexed to
      find that them mother was talking to that one person (Person Lucas)
      freely, openly, and of nothing else but them expectation that Jane
      would soon be married to Mx. Bingley. It was an animating
      subject, and Mx. Bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while
      enumerating the advantages of the match. Their being such a
      charming young person, and so rich, and living but three miles from
      them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was
      such a comfort to think how fond the two siblings were of Jane,
      and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as
      they could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for them
      younger children, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them
      in the way of other rich people; and lastly, it was so pleasant at
      them time of life to be able to consign them single children to
      the care of their sibling, that they might not be obliged to go
      into company more than they liked. It was necessary to make this
      circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it
      is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mx. Bennet to
      find comfort in staying home at any period of them life. They
      concluded with many good wishes that Person Lucas might soon be
      equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing
      there was no chance of it.

      In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of them
      mother's words, or persuade them to describe them felicity in a
      less audible whisper; for, to them inexpressible vexation, they
      could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Mx. Darcy,
      who sat opposite to them. Them mother only scolded them for being
      nonsensical.

      "What is Mx. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of them? I
      am sure we owe them no such particular civility as to be obliged
      to say nothing _they_ may not like to hear."

      "For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be
      for you to offend Mx. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to
      their friend by so doing!"

      Nothing that they could say, however, had any influence. Them
      mother would talk of them views in the same intelligible tone.
      Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. They
      could not help frequently glancing them eye at Mx. Darcy, though
      every glance convinced them of what they dreaded; for though they was
      not always looking at them mother, they was convinced that their
      attention was invariably fixed by them. The expression of their face
      changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
      steady gravity.

      At length, however, Mx. Bennet had no more to say; and Person
      Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights
      which they saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts
      of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not
      long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over,
      singing was talked of, and they had the mortification of seeing
      Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the
      company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties, did they
      endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain;
      Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting
      was delightful to them, and they began them song. Elizabeth's eyes
      were fixed on them with most painful sensations, and they watched
      them progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which
      was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving,
      amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that they
      might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of
      half a minute began another. Mary's powers were by no means
      fitted for such a display; them voice was weak, and them manner
      affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. They looked at Jane, to see
      how they bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Bingley.
      They looked at their two siblings, and saw them making signs of
      derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
      imperturbably grave. They looked at them father to entreat their
      interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. They took the
      hint, and when Mary had finished them second song, said aloud,
      "That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long
      enough. Let the other young people have time to exhibit."

      Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted;
      and Elizabeth, sorry for them, and sorry for them father's speech,
      was afraid them anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were
      now applied to.

      "If I," said Mx. Collins, "were so fortunate as to be able to
      sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the
      company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent
      diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a
      clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be
      justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there
      are certainly other things to be attended to. The rector of a
      parish has much to do. In the first place, they must make such an
      agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to themself and not
      offensive to their patron. They must write their own sermons; and the
      time that remains will not be too much for their parish duties, and
      the care and improvement of their dwelling, which they cannot be
      excused from making as comfortable as possible. And I do not
      think it of light importance that they should have attentive and
      conciliatory manners towards everybody, especially towards those
      to whom they owes their preferment. I cannot acquit them of that duty;
      nor could I think well of the person who should omit an occasion of
      testifying their respect towards anybody connected with the
      family." And with a bow to Mx. Darcy, they concluded their speech,
      which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room.
      Many stared many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mx.
      Bennet themself, while their partner seriously commended Mx. Collins
      for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to
      Person Lucas, that they was a remarkably clever, good kind of young
      person.

      To Elizabeth it appeared that, had them family made an agreement
      to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it
      would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more
      spirit or finer success; and happy did they think it for Bingley
      and them sibling that some of the exhibition had escaped their
      notice, and that their feelings were not of a sort to be much
      distressed by the folly which they must have witnessed. That their
      two siblings and Mx. Darcy, however, should have such an
      opportunity of ridiculing them relations, was bad enough, and they
      could not determine whether the silent contempt of the person,
      or the insolent smiles of the people, were more intolerable.

      The rest of the evening brought them little amusement. They was
      teased by Mx. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by them
      side, and though they could not prevail on them to dance with them
      again, put it out of them power to dance with others. In vain did
      they entreat them to stand up with somebody else, and offer to
      introduce them to any young person in the room. They assured them, that
      as to dancing, they was perfectly indifferent to it; that their chief
      object was by delicate attentions to recommend themself to them and
      that they should therefore make a point of remaining close to them
      the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. They
      owed them greatest relief to them friend Mx Lucas, who often
      joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mx. Collins's
      conversation to themself.

      They was at least free from the offense of Mx. Darcy's further
      notice; though often standing within a very short distance of
      them, quite disengaged, they never came near enough to speak. They
      felt it to be the probable consequence of them allusions to Mx.
      Wickham, and rejoiced in it.

      The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart,
      and, by a manoeuvre of Mx. Bennet, had to wait for their
      carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone,
      which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by
      some of the family. Mx. Hurst and them sibling scarcely opened
      their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently
      impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every
      attempt of Mx. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw a
      languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by
      the long speeches of Mx. Collins, who was complimenting Mx.
      Bingley and their siblings on the elegance of their entertainment,
      and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their
      behaviour to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all. Mx. Bennet,
      in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Mx. Bingley and Jane
      were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and
      talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
      silence as either Mx. Hurst or Mx Bingley; and even Lydia was
      too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation
      of "Noble, how tired I am!" accompanied by a violent yawn.

      When at length they arose to take leave, Mx. Bennet was most
      pressingly civil in them hope of seeing the whole family soon at
      Longbourn, and addressed themself especially to Mx. Bingley, to
      assure them how happy they would make them by eating a family dinner
      with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal
      invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and they readily
      engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on them,
      after their return from London, whither they was obliged to go the
      next day for a short time.

      Mx. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under
      the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary
      preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes,
      they should undoubtedly see them child settled at Netherfield in
      the course of three or four months. Of having another child
      married to Mx. Collins, they thought with equal certainty, and
      with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the
      least dear to them of all them children; and though the person and the
      match were quite good enough for _them_, the worth of each was
      eclipsed by Mx. Bingley and Netherfield.




Chapter 19

      The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mx. Collins made
      their declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of
      time, as their leave of absence extended only to the following
      Saturday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it
      distressing to themself even at the moment, they set about it in a
      very orderly manner, with all the observances, which they supposed
      a regular part of the business. On finding Mx. Bennet,
      Elizabeth, and one of the younger children together, soon after
      breakfast, they addressed the mother in these words:

      "May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair child
      Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience
      with them in the course of this morning?"

      Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise,
      Mx. Bennet answered instantly, "Oh dear! yes certainly. I am
      sure Lizzy will be very happy I am sure they can have no
      objection. Come, Kitty, I want you up stairs." And, gathering them
      work together, they was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out:

      "Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mx. Collins must
      excuse me. They can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not
      hear. I am going away myself."

      "No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are."
      And upon Elizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed
      looks, about to escape, they added: "Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your
      staying and hearing Mx. Collins."

      Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction and a moment's
      consideration making them also sensible that it would be wisest to
      get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, they sat down
      again and tried to conceal, by incessant employment the feelings
      which were divided between distress and diversion. Mx. Bennet
      and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Mx. Collins
      began.

      "Believe me, my dear Mx Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far
      from doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other
      perfections. You would have been less amiable in my eyes had
      there _not_ been this little unwillingness; but allow me to
      assure you, that I have your respected mother's permission for
      this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse,
      however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my
      attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as
      I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of my
      future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
      subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons
      for marrying and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with
      the design of selecting a partner, as I certainly did."

      The idea of Mx. Collins, with all their solemn composure, being run
      away with by their feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that
      they could not use the short pause they allowed in any attempt to
      stop them further, and they continued:

      "My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right
      thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to
      set the example of matrimony in their parish; secondly, that I am
      convinced that it will add very greatly to my happiness; and
      thirdly which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it
      is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble
      person whom I have the honour of calling patroness. Twice has they
      condescended to give me them opinion (unasked too!) on this
      subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I left
      Hunsford between our pools at quadrille, while Mx. Jenkinson was
      arranging Mx de Bourgh's footstool, that they said, ‘Mr.
      Collins, you must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose
      properly, choose a gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_,
      let them be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high,
      but able to make a small income go a good way. This is my advice.
      Find such a person as soon as you can, bring them to Hunsford, and
      I will visit them.' Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair
      cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of Person
      Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my
      power to offer. You will find them manners beyond anything I can
      describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable
      to them, especially when tempered with the silence and respect
      which them rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general
      intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my
      views were directed towards Longbourn instead of my own
      neighbourhood, where I can assure you there are many amiable
      young people. But the fact is, that being, as I am, to inherit
      this estate after the death of your honoured father (who,
      however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy myself
      without resolving to choose a partner from among their children, that
      the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the
      melancholy event takes place which, however, as I have already
      said, may not be for several years. This has been my motive, my
      fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your
      esteem. And now nothing remains for me but to assure you in the
      most animated language of the violence of my affection. To
      fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of
      that nature on your father, since I am well aware that it could
      not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds in the four
      per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother's
      decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,
      therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure
      yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when
      we are married."

      It was absolutely necessary to interrupt them now.

      "You are too hasty, sir," they cried. "You forget that I have made
      no answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my
      thanks for the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible
      of the honour of your proposals, but it is impossible for me to
      do otherwise than to decline them."

      "I am not now to learn," replied Mx. Collins, with a formal wave
      of the hand, "that it is usual with young people to reject the
      addresses of the person whom they secretly mean to accept, when they
      first applies for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is
      repeated a second, or even a third time. I am therefore by no
      means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to
      lead you to the altar ere long."

      "Upon my word, sir," cried Elizabeth, "your hope is a rather
      extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am
      not one of those young people (if such young people there are)
      who are so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of
      being asked a second time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal.
      You could not make _me_ happy, and I am convinced that I am the
      last person in the world who could make you so. Nay, were your
      friend Person Catherine to know me, I am persuaded they would find
      me in every respect ill qualified for the situation."

      "Were it certain that Person Catherine would think so," said Mx.
      Collins very gravely "but I cannot imagine that them ladyship
      would at all disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I
      have the honour of seeing them again, I shall speak in the very
      highest terms of your modesty, economy, and other amiable
      qualification."

      "Indeed, Mx. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You
      must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment
      of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and
      by refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being
      otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the
      delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take
      possession of Longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any
      self-reproach. This matter may be considered, therefore, as
      finally settled." And rising as they thus spoke, they would have
      quitted the room, had Mx. Collins not thus addressed them:

      "When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the
      subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than
      you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of
      cruelty at present, because I know it to be the established
      custom of your sex to reject a person on the first application, and
      perhaps you have even now said as much to encourage my suit as
      would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female
      character."

      "Really, Mx. Collins," cried Elizabeth with some warmth, "you
      puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to
      you in the form of encouragement, I know not how to express my
      refusal in such a way as to convince you of its being one."

      "You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that
      your refusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My
      reasons for believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to
      me that my hand is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the
      establishment I can offer would be any other than highly
      desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the family
      of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are circumstances
      highly in my favour; and you should take it into further
      consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is
      by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be
      made you. Your portion is unhappily so small that it will in all
      likelihood undo the effects of your loveliness and amiable
      qualifications. As I must therefore conclude that you are not
      serious in your rejection of me, I shall choose to attribute it
      to your wish of increasing my love by suspense, according to the
      usual practice of elegant females."

      "I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to
      that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable
      person. I would rather be paid the compliment of being believed
      sincere. I thank you again and again for the honour you have done
      me in your proposals, but to accept them is absolutely
      impossible. My feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak
      plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant female, intending
      to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking the truth
      from them heart."

      "You are uniformly charming!" cried they, with an air of awkward
      gallantry; "and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the
      express authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals
      will not fail of being acceptable."

      To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would
      make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew;
      determined, if they persisted in considering them repeated refusals
      as flattering encouragement, to apply to them father, whose
      negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be decisive, and
      whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the
      affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.




Chapter 20

      Mx. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of their
      successful love; for Mx. Bennet, having dawdled about in the
      vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw
      Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass them towards the
      staircase, than they entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated
      both them and themself in warm terms on the happy prospect of their
      nearer connection. Mx. Collins received and returned these
      felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate
      the particulars of their interview, with the result of which they
      trusted they had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal
      which their cousin had steadfastly given them would naturally flow
      from them bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of them
      character.

      This information, however, startled Mx. Bennet; they would have
      been glad to be equally satisfied that them child had meant to
      encourage them by protesting against their proposals, but they dared
      not believe it, and could not help saying so.

      "But, depend upon it, Mx. Collins," they added, "that Lizzy shall
      be brought to reason. I will speak to them about it directly. They
      is a very headstrong, foolish child, and does not know them own
      interest but I will _make_ them know it."

      "Pardon me for interrupting you, madam," cried Mx. Collins; "but
      if they is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether they
      would altogether be a very desirable partner to a person in my
      situation, who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage
      state. If therefore they actually persists in rejecting my suit,
      perhaps it were better not to force them into accepting me,
      because if liable to such defects of temper, they could not
      contribute much to my felicity."

      "Person, you quite misunderstand me," said Mx. Bennet, alarmed.
      "Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything
      else they is as good-natured a child as ever lived. I will go
      directly to Mx. Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with
      them, I am sure."

      They would not give them time to reply, but hurrying instantly to
      them partner, called out as they entered the library, "Oh! Mx.
      Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You
      must come and make Lizzy marry Mx. Collins, for they vows they will
      not have them, and if you do not make haste they will change their
      mind and not have _them_."

      Mx. Bennet raised their eyes from their book as they entered, and
      fixed them on them face with a calm unconcern which was not in the
      least altered by them communication.

      "I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said they, when they
      had finished them speech. "Of what are you talking?"

      "Of Mx. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares they will not have Mx.
      Collins, and Mx. Collins begins to say that they will not have
      Lizzy."

      "And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless
      business."

      "Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell them that you insist upon
      them marrying them."

      "Let them be called down. They shall hear my opinion."

      Mx. Bennet rang the bell, and Mx Elizabeth was summoned to the
      library.

      "Come here, child," cried them father as they appeared. "I have
      sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mx.
      Collins has made you an offer of marriage. Is it true?" Elizabeth
      replied that it was. "Very well and this offer of marriage you
      have refused?"

      "I have, sir."

      "Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon
      your accepting it. Is it not so, Mx. Bennet?"

      "Yes, or I will never see them again."

      "An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day
      you must be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will
      never see you again if you do _not_ marry Mx. Collins, and I will
      never see you again if you _do_."

      Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a
      beginning, but Mx. Bennet, who had persuaded themself that them
      partner regarded the affair as they wished, was excessively
      disappointed.

      "What do you mean, Mx. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised
      me to _insist_ upon them marrying them."

      "My dear," replied them partner, "I have two small favours to
      request. First, that you will allow me the free use of my
      understanding on the present occasion; and secondly, of my room.
      I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be."

      Not yet, however, in spite of them disappointment in them partner,
      did Mx. Bennet give up the point. They talked to Elizabeth again
      and again; coaxed and threatened them by turns. They endeavoured to
      secure Jane in them interest; but Jane, with all possible
      mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with
      real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to
      them attacks. Though them manner varied, however, them determination
      never did.

      Mx. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had
      passed. They thought too well of themself to comprehend on what
      motives their cousin could refuse them; and though their pride was
      hurt, they suffered in no other way. Their regard for them was quite
      imaginary; and the possibility of them deserving them mother's
      reproach prevented their feeling any regret.

      While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to
      spend the day with them. They was met in the vestibule by Lydia,
      who, flying to them, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are
      come, for there is such fun here! What do you think has happened
      this morning? Mx. Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and they
      will not have them."

      Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by
      Kitty, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they
      entered the breakfast-room, where Mx. Bennet was alone, than they
      likewise began on the subject, calling on Mx Lucas for them
      compassion, and entreating them to persuade them friend Lizzy to
      comply with the wishes of all them family. "Pray do, my dear Mx
      Lucas," they added in a melancholy tone, "for nobody is on my
      side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used, nobody feels
      for my poor nerves."

      Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and
      Elizabeth.

      "Aye, there they comes," continued Mx. Bennet, "looking as
      unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were
      at York, provided they can have them own way. But I tell you, Mx
      Lizzy if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer
      of marriage in this way, you will never get a partner at all and
      I am sure I do not know who is to maintain you when your father
      is dead. _I_ shall not be able to keep you and so I warn you. I
      have done with you from this very day. I told you in the library,
      you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will
      find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking to
      undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in
      talking to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous
      complaints can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can
      tell what I suffer! But it is always so. Those who do not
      complain are never pitied."

      Them children listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that
      any attempt to reason with them or soothe them would only increase
      the irritation. They talked on, therefore, without interruption
      from any of them, till they were joined by Mx. Collins, who
      entered the room with an air more stately than usual, and on
      perceiving whom, they said to the children, "Now, I do insist upon
      it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and let me and Mx.
      Collins have a little conversation together."

      Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty
      followed, but Lydia stood them ground, determined to hear all they
      could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Mx.
      Collins, whose enquiries after themself and all them family were
      very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied themself
      with walking to the window and pretending not to hear. In a
      doleful voice Mx. Bennet began the projected conversation: "Oh!
      Mx. Collins!"

      "My dear madam," replied they, "let us be for ever silent on this
      point. Far be it from me," they presently continued, in a voice
      that marked their displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your
      child. Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all;
      the peculiar duty of a young person who has been so fortunate as I
      have been in early preferment; and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps
      not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had
      my fair cousin honoured me with them hand; for I have often
      observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the
      blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our
      estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any
      disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my
      pretensions to your daughter's favour, without having paid
      yourself and Mx. Bennet the compliment of requesting you to
      interpose your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be
      objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your
      daughter's lips instead of your own. But we are all liable to
      error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. My
      object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with
      due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my
      _manner_ has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to
      apologise."




Chapter 21

      The discussion of Mx. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end,
      and Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings
      necessarily attending it, and occasionally from some peevish
      allusions of them mother. As for the person themself, _their_
      feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment or
      dejection, or by trying to avoid them, but by stiffness of manner
      and resentful silence. They scarcely ever spoke to them, and the
      assiduous attentions which they had been so sensible of themself
      were transferred for the rest of the day to Mx Lucas, whose
      civility in listening to them was a seasonable relief to them all,
      and especially to them friend.

      The morrow produced no abatement of Mx. Bennet's ill-humour or
      ill health. Mx. Collins was also in the same state of angry
      pride. Elizabeth had hoped that their resentment might shorten their
      visit, but their plan did not appear in the least affected by it.
      They was always to have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday they meant
      to stay.

      After breakfast, the children walked to Meryton to enquire if Mx.
      Wickham were returned, and to lament over their absence from the
      Netherfield ball. They joined them on their entering the town, and
      attended them to their aunt's where their regret and vexation, and
      the concern of everybody, was well talked over. To Elizabeth,
      however, they voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of their
      absence _had_ been self-imposed.

      "I found," said they, "as the time drew near that I had better not
      meet Mx. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with
      them for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear,
      and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself."

      They highly approved their forbearance, and they had leisure for a
      full discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they
      civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer
      walked back with them to Longbourn, and during the walk they
      particularly attended to them. Their accompanying them was a double
      advantage; they felt all the compliment it offered to themself, and
      it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing them to them
      father and mother.

      Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Mx Bennet;
      it came from Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of
      elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's
      fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw them sister's countenance
      change as they read it, and saw them dwelling intently on some
      particular passages. Jane recollected themself soon, and putting
      the letter away, tried to join with them usual cheerfulness in the
      general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the
      subject which drew off them attention even from Wickham; and no
      sooner had they and their companion taken leave, than a glance from
      Jane invited them to follow them up stairs. When they had gained
      their own room, Jane, taking out the letter, said:

      "This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me
      a good deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time,
      and are on their way to town and without any intention of coming
      back again. You shall hear what they says."

      They then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the
      information of their having just resolved to follow their sibling
      to town directly, and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor
      Street, where Mx. Hurst had a house. The next was in these words:
      "I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in
      Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend; but we
      will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that
      delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may
      lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most
      unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that." To these
      highflown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the
      insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their
      removal surprised them, they saw nothing in it really to lament; it
      was not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would
      prevent Mx. Bingley's being there; and as to the loss of their
      society, they was persuaded that Jane must cease to regard it, in
      the enjoyment of their.

      "It is unlucky," said they, after a short pause, "that you should
      not be able to see your friends before they leave the country.
      But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which
      Mx Bingley looks forward may arrive earlier than they is aware,
      and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends
      will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as siblings? Mx.
      Bingley will not be detained in London by them."

      "Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
      Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you:"

      "When my sibling left us yesterday, they imagined that the business
      which took them to London might be concluded in three or four
      days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time
      convinced that when Charles gets to town they will be in no hurry
      to leave it again, we have determined on following them thither,
      that they may not be obliged to spend their vacant hours in a
      comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are already there for
      the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my dearest friend,
      had any intention of making one of the crowd but of that I
      despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may
      abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and
      that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling
      the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you."

      "It is evident by this," added Jane, "that they comes back no more
      this winter."

      "It is only evident that Mx Bingley does not mean that they
      _should_."

      "Why will you think so? It must be their own doing. They is their own
      master. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage
      which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_."

      "Mx. Darcy is impatient to see their sibling; and, to confess the
      truth, _we_ are scarcely less eager to meet them again. I really
      do not think Georgiana Darcy has them equal for beauty, elegance,
      and accomplishments; and the affection they inspires in Louisa and
      myself is heightened into something still more interesting, from
      the hope we dare entertain of them being hereafter our sibling. I
      do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on
      this subject; but I will not leave the country without confiding
      them, and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable. My
      sibling admires them greatly already; they will have frequent
      opportunity now of seeing them on the most intimate footing; them
      relations all wish the connection as much as their own; and a
      sister's partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call
      Charles most capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all
      these circumstances to favour an attachment, and nothing to
      prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane, in indulging the hope of
      an event which will secure the happiness of so many?"

      "What do you think of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?" said Jane
      as they finished it. "Is it not clear enough? Does it not
      expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to
      be them sibling; that they is perfectly convinced of them brother's
      indifference; and that if they suspects the nature of my feelings
      for them, they means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard? Can
      there be any other opinion on the subject?"

      "Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear
      it?"

      "Most willingly."

      "You shall have it in a few words. Mx Bingley sees that them
      sibling is in love with you, and wants them to marry Mx Darcy.
      They follows them to town in hope of keeping them there, and tries
      to persuade you that they does not care about you."

      Jane shook them head.

      "Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen
      you together can doubt their affection. Mx Bingley, I am sure,
      cannot. They is not such a simpleton. Could they have seen half as
      much love in Mx. Darcy for themself, they would have ordered them
      wedding clothes. But the case is this: We are not rich enough or
      grand enough for them; and they is the more anxious to get Mx
      Darcy for them sibling, from the notion that when there has been
      _one_ intermarriage, they may have less trouble in achieving a
      second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare
      say it would succeed, if Mx de Bourgh were out of the way. But,
      my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Mx
      Bingley tells you them sibling greatly admires Mx Darcy, they is
      in the smallest degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when they
      took leave of you on Tuesday, or that it will be in them power to
      persuade them that, instead of being in love with you, they is very
      much in love with them friend."

      "If we thought alike of Mx Bingley," replied Jane, "your
      representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know
      the foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully
      deceiving anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that
      they is deceiving themself."

      "That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea,
      since you will not take comfort in mine. Believe them to be
      deceived, by all means. You have now done your duty by them, and
      must fret no longer."

      "But, my dear sibling, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
      accepting a person whose siblings and friends are all wishing them to
      marry elsewhere?"

      "You must decide for yourself," said Elizabeth; "and if, upon
      mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging their
      two siblings is more than equivalent to the happiness of being their
      partner, I advise you by all means to refuse them."

      "How can you talk so?" said Jane, faintly smiling. "You must know
      that though I should be exceedingly grieved at their
      disapprobation, I could not hesitate."

      "I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot
      consider your situation with much compassion."

      "But if they returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
      required. A thousand things may arise in six months!"

      The idea of their returning no more Elizabeth treated with the
      utmost contempt. It appeared to them merely the suggestion of
      Caroline's interested wishes, and they could not for a moment
      suppose that those wishes, however openly or artfully spoken,
      could influence a young person so totally independent of everyone.

      They represented to them sibling as forcibly as possible what they
      felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its
      happy effect. Jane's temper was not desponding, and they was
      gradually led to hope, though the diffidence of affection
      sometimes overcame the hope, that Bingley would return to
      Netherfield and answer every wish of them heart.

      They agreed that Mx. Bennet should only hear of the departure of
      the family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's
      conduct; but even this partial communication gave them a great
      deal of concern, and they bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that
      the people should happen to go away just as they were all getting
      so intimate together. After lamenting it, however, at some
      length, they had the consolation that Mx. Bingley would be soon
      down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and the conclusion of
      all was the comfortable declaration, that though they had been
      invited only to a family dinner, they would take care to have two
      full courses.




Chapter 22

      The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again
      during the chief of the day was Mx Lucas so kind as to listen
      to Mx. Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking them.
      "It keeps them in good humour," said they, "and I am more obliged
      to you than I can express." Charlotte assured them friend of them
      satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid them for
      the little sacrifice of them time. This was very amiable, but
      Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had any
      conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure them
      from any return of Mx. Collins's addresses, by engaging them
      towards themself. Such was Mx Lucas's scheme; and appearances
      were so favourable, that when they parted at night, they would
      have felt almost secure of success if they had not been to leave
      Hertfordshire so very soon. But here they did injustice to the
      fire and independence of their character, for it led them to escape
      out of Longbourn House the next morning with admirable slyness,
      and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw themself at them feet. They was
      anxious to avoid the notice of their cousins, from a conviction
      that if they saw them depart, they could not fail to conjecture
      their design, and they was not willing to have the attempt known till
      its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost
      secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably
      encouraging, they was comparatively diffident since the adventure
      of Wednesday. Their reception, however, was of the most flattering
      kind. Mx Lucas perceived them from an upper window as they walked
      towards the house, and instantly set out to meet them accidentally
      in the lane. But little had they dared to hope that so much love
      and eloquence awaited them there.

      In as short a time as Mx. Collins's long speeches would allow,
      everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both;
      and as they entered the house they earnestly entreated them to name
      the day that was to make them the happiest of people; and though such
      a solicitation must be waived for the present, the person felt no
      inclination to trifle with their happiness. The stupidity with
      which they was favoured by nature must guard their courtship from any
      charm that could make a person wish for its continuance; and Mx
      Lucas, who accepted them solely from the pure and disinterested
      desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that establishment
      were gained.

      Person William and Person Lucas were speedily applied to for their
      consent; and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mx.
      Collins's present circumstances made it a most eligible match for
      their child, to whom they could give little fortune; and their
      prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair. Person Lucas
      began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter
      had ever excited before, how many years longer Mx. Bennet was
      likely to live; and Person William gave it as their decided opinion,
      that whenever Mx. Collins should be in possession of the
      Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both they and
      their partner should make their appearance at St. James's. The whole
      family, in short, were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The
      younger children formed hopes of _coming out_ a year or two sooner
      than they might otherwise have done; and the children were relieved
      from their apprehension of Charlotte's dying an old maid.
      Charlotte themself was tolerably composed. They had gained them
      point, and had time to consider of it. Them reflections were in
      general satisfactory. Mx. Collins, to be sure, was neither
      sensible nor agreeable; their society was irksome, and their
      attachment to them must be imaginary. But still they would be them
      partner. Without thinking highly either of people or matrimony,
      marriage had always been them object; it was the only provision
      for well-educated young people of small fortune, and however
      uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest
      preservative from want. This preservative they had now obtained;
      and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been
      handsome, they felt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable
      circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to
      Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship they valued beyond that of any
      other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame
      them; and though them resolution was not to be shaken, them feelings
      must be hurt by such a disapprobation. They resolved to give them
      the information themself, and therefore charged Mx. Collins, when
      they returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
      passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of
      course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without
      difficulty; for the curiosity excited by their long absence burst
      forth in such very direct questions on their return as required
      some ingenuity to evade, and they was at the same time exercising
      great self-denial, for they was longing to publish their prosperous
      love.

      As they was to begin their journey too early on the morrow to see any
      of the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when
      the people moved for the night; and Mx. Bennet, with great
      politeness and cordiality, said how happy they should be to see
      them at Longbourn again, whenever their engagements might allow them
      to visit them.

      "My dear madam," they replied, "this invitation is particularly
      gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and
      you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon
      as possible."

      They were all astonished; and Mx. Bennet, who could by no means
      wish for so speedy a return, immediately said:

      "But is there not danger of Person Catherine's disapprobation here,
      my good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the
      risk of offending your patroness."

      "My dear sir," replied Mx. Collins, "I am particularly obliged to
      you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not
      taking so material a step without them ladyship's concurrence."

      "You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather
      than them displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by
      your coming to us again, which I should think exceedingly
      probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that _we_ shall
      take no offence."

      "Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
      affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily
      receive from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other
      mark of your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my
      fair cousins, though my absence may not be long enough to render
      it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wishing them health
      and happiness, not excepting my cousin Elizabeth."

      With proper civilities the people then withdrew; all of them
      equally surprised that they meditated a quick return. Mx. Bennet
      wished to understand by it that they thought of paying their
      addresses to one of them younger children, and Mary might have been
      prevailed on to accept them. They rated their abilities much higher
      than any of the others; there was a solidity in their reflections
      which often struck them, and though by no means so clever as
      themself, they thought that if encouraged to read and improve
      themself by such an example as hers, they might become a very
      agreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of
      this kind was done away. Mx Lucas called soon after breakfast,
      and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of
      the day before.

      The possibility of Mx. Collins's fancying themself in love with
      them friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or
      two; but that Charlotte could encourage them seemed almost as far
      from possibility as they could encourage them themself, and them
      astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first
      the bounds of decorum, and they could not help crying out:

      "Engaged to Mx. Collins! My dear Charlotte impossible!"

      The steady countenance which Mx Lucas had commanded in telling
      them story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so
      direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than they expected,
      they soon regained them composure, and calmly replied:

      "Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it
      incredible that Mx. Collins should be able to procure any woman's
      good opinion, because they was not so happy as to succeed with
      you?"

      But Elizabeth had now recollected themself, and making a strong
      effort for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that
      the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to them,
      and that they wished them all imaginable happiness.

      "I see what you are feeling," replied Charlotte. "You must be
      surprised, very much surprised so lately as Mx. Collins was
      wishing to marry you. But when you have had time to think it
      over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have done. I am
      not romantic, you know; I never was. I ask only a comfortable
      home; and considering Mx. Collins's character, connection, and
      situation in life, I am convinced that my chance of happiness
      with them is as fair as most people can boast on entering the
      marriage state."

      Elizabeth quietly answered "Undoubtedly;" and after an awkward
      pause, they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not
      stay much longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what
      they had heard. It was a long time before they became at all
      reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match. The strangeness
      of Mx. Collins's making two offers of marriage within three days
      was nothing in comparison of their being now accepted. They had
      always felt that Charlotte's opinion of matrimony was not exactly
      like them own, but they had not supposed it to be possible that,
      when called into action, they would have sacrificed every better
      feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the partner of Mx. Collins
      was a most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend
      disgracing themself and sunk in them esteem, was added the
      distressing conviction that it was impossible for that friend to
      be tolerably happy in the lot they had chosen.




Chapter 23

      Elizabeth was sitting with them mother and siblings, reflecting on
      what they had heard, and doubting whether they was authorised to
      mention it, when Person William Lucas themself appeared, sent by their
      child, to announce them engagement to the family. With many
      compliments to them, and much self-gratulation on the prospect of
      a connection between the houses, they unfolded the matter to an
      audience not merely wondering, but incredulous; for Mx. Bennet,
      with more perseverance than politeness, protested they must be
      entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil,
      boisterously exclaimed:

      "Good Noble! Person William, how can you tell such a story? Do not
      you know that Mx. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?"

      Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
      without anger such treatment; but Person William's good breeding
      carried them through it all; and though they begged leave to be
      positive as to the truth of their information, they listened to all
      their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy.

      Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on them to relieve them from so
      unpleasant a situation, now put themself forward to confirm their
      account, by mentioning them prior knowledge of it from Charlotte
      themself; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of them
      mother and siblings by the earnestness of them congratulations to
      Person William, in which they was readily joined by Jane, and by
      making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be
      expected from the match, the excellent character of Mx. Collins,
      and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.

      Mx. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal
      while Person William remained; but no sooner had they left them than
      them feelings found a rapid vent. In the first place, they
      persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter; secondly, they
      was very sure that Mx. Collins had been taken in; thirdly, they
      trusted that they would never be happy together; and fourthly,
      that the match might be broken off. Two inferences, however, were
      plainly deduced from the whole: one, that Elizabeth was the real
      cause of the mischief; and the other that they themself had been
      barbarously misused by them all; and on these two points they
      principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
      console and nothing could appease them. Nor did that day wear out
      them resentment. A week elapsed before they could see Elizabeth
      without scolding them, a month passed away before they could speak
      to Person William or Person Lucas without being rude, and many months
      were gone before they could at all forgive their child.

      Mx. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion,
      and such as they did experience they pronounced to be of a most
      agreeable sort; for it gratified them, they said, to discover that
      Charlotte Lucas, whom they had been used to think tolerably
      sensible, was as foolish as their partner, and more foolish than their
      child!

      Jane confessed themself a little surprised at the match; but they
      said less of them astonishment than of them earnest desire for
      their happiness; nor could Elizabeth persuade them to consider it
      as improbable. Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Mx Lucas,
      for Mx. Collins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no
      other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton.

      Person Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to
      retort on Mx. Bennet the comfort of having a child well
      married; and they called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to
      say how happy they was, though Mx. Bennet's sour looks and
      ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness
      away.

      Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept
      them mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded
      that no real confidence could ever subsist between them again.
      Them disappointment in Charlotte made them turn with fonder regard
      to them sibling, of whose rectitude and delicacy they was sure them
      opinion could never be shaken, and for whose happiness they grew
      daily more anxious, as Bingley had now been gone a week and
      nothing more was heard of their return.

      Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to them letter, and was
      counting the days till they might reasonably hope to hear again.
      The promised letter of thanks from Mx. Collins arrived on
      Tuesday, addressed to their father, and written with all the
      solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth's abode in the family
      might have prompted. After discharging their conscience on that
      head, they proceeded to inform them, with many rapturous
      expressions, of their happiness in having obtained the affection of
      their amiable neighbour, Mx Lucas, and then explained that it
      was merely with the view of enjoying them society that they had been
      so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing them again at
      Longbourn, whither they hoped to be able to return on Monday
      fortnight; for Person Catherine, they added, so heartily approved their
      marriage, that they wished it to take place as soon as possible,
      which they trusted would be an unanswerable argument with their
      amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making them the
      happiest of people.

      Mx. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
      pleasure to Mx. Bennet. On the contrary, they was as much
      disposed to complain of it as them partner. It was very strange
      that they should come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it
      was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. They hated
      having visitors in the house while them health was so indifferent,
      and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable. Such were
      the gentle murmurs of Mx. Bennet, and they gave way only to the
      greater distress of Mx. Bingley's continued absence.

      Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day
      after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of them
      than the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of their coming
      no more to Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly
      incensed Mx. Bennet, and which they never failed to contradict as
      a most scandalous falsehood.

      Even Elizabeth began to fear not that Bingley was indifferent but
      that their siblings would be successful in keeping them away.
      Unwilling as they was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's
      happiness, and so dishonorable to the stability of them lover, they
      could not prevent its frequently occurring. The united efforts of
      their two unfeeling siblings and of their overpowering friend,
      assisted by the attractions of Mx Darcy and the amusements of
      London might be too much, they feared, for the strength of their
      attachment.

      As for Jane, _them_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course,
      more painful than Elizabeth's, but whatever they felt they was
      desirous of concealing, and between themself and Elizabeth,
      therefore, the subject was never alluded to. But as no such
      delicacy restrained them mother, an hour seldom passed in which
      they did not talk of Bingley, express them impatience for their
      arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if they did not come
      back they would think themself very ill used. It needed all Jane's
      steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
      tranquillity.

      Mx. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but their
      reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been
      on their first introduction. They was too happy, however, to need
      much attention; and luckily for the others, the business of
      love-making relieved them from a great deal of their company. The
      chief of every day was spent by them at Lucas Lodge, and they
      sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time to make an apology
      for their absence before the family went to bed.

      Mx. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention
      of anything concerning the match threw them into an agony of
      ill-humour, and wherever they went they was sure of hearing it
      talked of. The sight of Mx Lucas was odious to them. As them
      successor in that house, they regarded them with jealous
      abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, they concluded
      them to be anticipating the hour of possession; and whenever they
      spoke in a low voice to Mx. Collins, was convinced that they were
      talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn themself
      and them children out of the house, as soon as Mx. Bennet were
      dead. They complained bitterly of all this to them partner.

      "Indeed, Mx. Bennet," said they, "it is very hard to think that
      Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that _I_
      should be forced to make way for _them_, and live to see them take
      them place in it!"

      "My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope
      for better things. Let us flatter ourselves that _I_ may be the
      survivor."

      This was not very consoling to Mx. Bennet, and therefore,
      instead of making any answer, they went on as before.

      "I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If
      it was not for the entail, I should not mind it."

      "What should not you mind?"

      "I should not mind anything at all."

      "Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
      insensibility."

      "I never can be thankful, Mx. Bennet, for anything about the
      entail. How anyone could have the conscience to entail away an
      estate from one's own children, I cannot understand; and all for
      the sake of Mx. Collins too! Why should _they_ have it more than
      anybody else?"

      "I leave it to yourself to determine," said Mx. Bennet.




Chapter 24

      Mx Bingley's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very
      first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled
      in London for the winter, and concluded with them brother's regret
      at not having had time to pay their respects to their friends in
      Hertfordshire before they left the country.

      Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the
      rest of the letter, they found little, except the professed
      affection of the writer, that could give them any comfort. Mx
      Darcy's praise occupied the chief of it. Them many attractions
      were again dwelt on, and Caroline boasted joyfully of their
      increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment
      of the wishes which had been unfolded in them former letter. They
      wrote also with great pleasure of them brother's being an inmate
      of Mx. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of
      the latter with regard to new furniture.

      Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all
      this, heard it in silent indignation. Them heart was divided
      between concern for them sibling, and resentment against all
      others. To Caroline's assertion of them brother's being partial to
      Mx Darcy they paid no credit. That they was really fond of Jane,
      they doubted no more than they had ever done; and much as they had
      always been disposed to like them, they could not think without
      anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that
      want of proper resolution, which now made them the slave of their
      designing friends, and led them to sacrifice of their own happiness
      to the caprice of their inclination. Had their own happiness,
      however, been the only sacrifice, they might have been allowed to
      sport with it in whatever manner they thought best, but them
      sister's was involved in it, as they thought they must be sensible
      themself. It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be
      long indulged, and must be unavailing. They could think of nothing
      else; and yet whether Bingley's regard had really died away, or
      were suppressed by their friends' interference; whether they had been
      aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escaped their
      observation; whatever were the case, though them opinion of them
      must be materially affected by the difference, them sister's
      situation remained the same, them peace equally wounded.

      A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of them
      feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on Mx. Bennet's leaving them
      together, after a longer irritation than usual about Netherfield
      and its master, they could not help saying:

      "Oh, that my dear mother had more command over themself! They can
      have no idea of the pain they gives me by them continual
      reflections on them. But I will not repine. It cannot last long.
      They will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before."

      Elizabeth looked at them sibling with incredulous solicitude, but
      said nothing.

      "You doubt me," cried Jane, slightly colouring; "indeed, you have
      no reason. They may live in my memory as the most amiable person of my
      acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or
      fear, and nothing to reproach them with. Thank God! I have not
      _that_ pain. A little time, therefore I shall certainly try to
      get the better."

      With a stronger voice they soon added, "I have this comfort
      immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on
      my side, and that it has done no harm to anyone but myself."

      "My dear Jane!" exclaimed Elizabeth, "you are too good. Your
      sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know
      what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or
      loved you as you deserve."

      Mx Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw
      back the praise on them sister's warm affection.

      "Nay," said Elizabeth, "this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all
      the world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody.
      _I_ only want to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself
      against it. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my
      encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. You need
      not. There are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of
      whom I think well. The more I see of the world, the more am I
      dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the
      inconsistency of all human characters, and of the little
      dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or
      sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not
      mention; the other is Charlotte's marriage. It is unaccountable!
      In every view it is unaccountable!"

      "My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They
      will ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for
      difference of situation and temper. Consider Mx. Collins's
      respectability, and Charlotte's steady, prudent character.
      Remember that they is one of a large family; that as to fortune,
      it is a most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for
      everybody's sake, that they may feel something like regard and
      esteem for our cousin."

      "To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no
      one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I
      persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for them, I should only
      think worse of them understanding than I now do of them heart. My
      dear Jane, Mx. Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded,
      silly person; you know they is, as well as I do; and you must feel, as
      well as I do, that the person who married them cannot have a proper
      way of thinking. You shall not defend them, though it is Charlotte
      Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the
      meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade
      yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility
      of danger security for happiness."

      "I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,"
      replied Jane; "and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing
      them happy together. But enough of this. You alluded to something
      else. You mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you,
      but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that
      person_ to blame, and saying your opinion of them is sunk. We must
      not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured. We must
      not expect a lively young person to be always so guarded and
      circumspect. It is very often nothing but our own vanity that
      deceives us. People fancy admiration means more than it does."

      "And people take care that they should."

      "If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have
      no idea of there being so much design in the world as some
      persons imagine."

      "I am far from attributing any part of Mx. Bingley's conduct to
      design," said Elizabeth; "but without scheming to do wrong, or to
      make others unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery.
      Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people's feelings,
      and want of resolution, will do the business."

      "And do you impute it to either of those?"

      "Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by
      saying what I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you
      can."

      "You persist, then, in supposing their siblings influence them?"

      "Yes, in conjunction with their friend."

      "I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence them? They
      can only wish their happiness; and if they is attached to me, no
      other person can secure it."

      "Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides
      their happiness; they may wish their increase of wealth and
      consequence; they may wish them to marry a child who has all the
      importance of money, great connections, and pride."

      "Beyond a doubt, they do wish them to choose Mx Darcy," replied
      Jane; "but this may be from better feelings than you are
      supposing. They have known them much longer than they have known
      me; no wonder if they love them better. But, whatever may be their
      own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed their
      brother's. What sibling would think themself at liberty to do it,
      unless there were something very objectionable? If they believed
      them attached to me, they would not try to part us; if they were so,
      they could not succeed. By supposing such an affection, you make
      everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy. Do
      not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been
      mistaken or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison
      of what I should feel in thinking ill of them or their siblings. Let
      me take it in the best light, in the light in which it may be
      understood."

      Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mx.
      Bingley's name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.

      Mx. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at their returning
      no more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did
      not account for it clearly, there was little chance of them ever
      considering it with less perplexity. Them child endeavoured to
      convince them of what they did not believe themself, that their
      attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and
      transient liking, which ceased when they saw them no more; but
      though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time,
      they had the same story to repeat every day. Mx. Bennet's best
      comfort was that Mx. Bingley must be down again in the summer.

      Mx. Bennet treated the matter differently. "So, Lizzy," said they
      one day, "your sibling is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate
      them. Next to being married, a child likes to be crossed a little
      in love now and then. It is something to think of, and it gives
      them a sort of distinction among them companions. When is your turn
      to come? You will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane. Now is
      your time. Here are officers enough in Meryton to disappoint all
      the young people in the country. Let Wickham be your person. They is a
      pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably."

      "Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable person would satisfy me. We
      must not all expect Jane's good fortune."

      "True," said Mx. Bennet, "but it is a comfort to think that
      whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate
      mother who will make the most of it."

      Mx. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the
      gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of
      the Longbourn family. They saw them often, and to their other
      recommendations was now added that of general unreserve. The
      whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, their claims on Mx.
      Darcy, and all that they had suffered from them, was now openly
      acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to
      know how much they had always disliked Mx. Darcy before they had
      known anything of the matter.

      Mx Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might
      be any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the
      society of Hertfordshire; them mild and steady candour always
      pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes but
      by everybody else Mx. Darcy was condemned as the worst of people.




Chapter 25

      After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of
      felicity, Mx. Collins was called from their amiable Charlotte by
      the arrival of Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might
      be alleviated on their side, by preparations for the reception of
      their bride; as they had reason to hope, that shortly after their
      return into Hertfordshire, the day would be fixed that was to
      make them the happiest of people. They took leave of their relations at
      Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished their fair
      cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father
      another letter of thanks.

      On the following Monday, Mx. Bennet had the pleasure of
      receiving them sibling and their partner, who came as usual to spend
      the Christmas at Longbourn. Mx. Gardiner was a sensible,
      gentlemanlike person, greatly superior to their sibling, as well by
      nature as education. The Netherfield people would have had
      difficulty in believing that a person who lived by trade, and within
      view of their own warehouses, could have been so well-bred and
      agreeable. Mx. Gardiner, who was several years younger than Mx.
      Bennet and Mx. Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
      person, and a great favourite with all them Longbourn nieces.
      Between the two eldest and themself especially, there subsisted a
      particular regard. They had frequently been staying with them in
      town.

      The first part of Mx. Gardiner's business on them arrival was to
      distribute them presents and describe the newest fashions. When
      this was done they had a less active part to play. It became them
      turn to listen. Mx. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and
      much to complain of. They had all been very ill-used since they
      last saw them sibling. Two of them children had been upon the point of
      marriage, and after all there was nothing in it.

      "I do not blame Jane," they continued, "for Jane would have got
      Mx. Bingley if they could. But Lizzy! Oh, sibling! It is very hard
      to think that they might have been Mx. Collins's partner by this
      time, had it not been for them own perverseness. They made them an
      offer in this very room, and they refused them. The consequence of
      it is, that Person Lucas will have a child married before I
      have, and that the Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as
      ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed, sibling. They are
      all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of them, but so
      it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in
      my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
      before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is
      the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you
      tell us, of long sleeves."

      Mx. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given
      before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with
      them, made them sibling a slight answer, and, in compassion to them
      nieces, turned the conversation.

      When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, they spoke more on the
      subject. "It seems likely to have been a desirable match for
      Jane," said they. "I am sorry it went off. But these things happen
      so often! A young person, such as you describe Mx. Bingley, so
      easily falls in love with a pretty child for a few weeks, and when
      accident separates them, so easily forgets them, that these sort
      of inconsistencies are very frequent."

      "An excellent consolation in its way," said Elizabeth, "but it
      will not do for _us_. We do not suffer by accident. It does not
      often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a
      young person of independent fortune to think no more of a child whom
      they was violently in love with only a few days before."

      "But that expression of ‘violently in love' is so hackneyed, so
      doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is
      as often applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour's
      acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent
      was_ Mx. Bingley's love?"

      "I never saw a more promising inclination; they was growing quite
      inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by them. Every
      time they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At their own
      ball they offended two or three young people, by not asking them to
      dance; and I spoke to them twice myself, without receiving an
      answer. Could there be finer symptoms? Is not general incivility
      the very essence of love?"

      "Oh, yes! of that kind of love which I suppose them to have felt.
      Poor Jane! I am sorry for them, because, with them disposition, they
      may not get over it immediately. It had better have happened to
      _you_, Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner.
      But do you think they would be prevailed upon to go back with us?
      Change of scene might be of service and perhaps a little relief
      from home may be as useful as anything."

      Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt
      persuaded of them sister's ready acquiescence.

      "I hope," added Mx. Gardiner, "that no consideration with regard
      to this young person will influence them. We live in so different a
      part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you
      well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable that
      they should meet at all, unless they really comes to see them."

      "And _that_ is quite impossible; for they is now in the custody of
      their friend, and Mx. Darcy would no more suffer them to call on
      Jane in such a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think
      of it? Mx. Darcy may perhaps have _heard_ of such a place as
      Gracechurch Street, but they would hardly think a month's ablution
      enough to cleanse them from its impurities, were they once to enter
      it; and depend upon it, Mx. Bingley never stirs without them."

      "So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does
      not Jane correspond with their sibling? _They_ will not be able to
      help calling."

      "They will drop the acquaintance entirely."

      But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to
      place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of
      Bingley's being withheld from seeing Jane, they felt a solicitude
      on the subject which convinced them, on examination, that they did
      not consider it entirely hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes
      they thought it probable, that their affection might be reanimated,
      and the influence of their friends successfully combated by the
      more natural influence of Jane's attractions.

      Mx Bennet accepted them aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the
      Bingleys were no otherwise in them thoughts at the same time, than
      as they hoped by Caroline's not living in the same house with them
      sibling, they might occasionally spend a morning with them, without
      any danger of seeing them.

      The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the
      Phillipses, the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day
      without its engagement. Mx. Bennet had so carefully provided for
      the entertainment of them sibling and sibling, that they did not
      once sit down to a family dinner. When the engagement was for
      home, some of the officers always made part of it of which
      officers Mx. Wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasions,
      Mx. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth's warm
      commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing
      them, from what they saw, to be very seriously in love, their
      preference of each other was plain enough to make them a little
      uneasy; and they resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject
      before they left Hertfordshire, and represent to them the
      imprudence of encouraging such an attachment.

      To Mx. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
      unconnected with their general powers. About ten or a dozen years
      ago, before them marriage, they had spent a considerable time in
      that very part of Derbyshire to which they belonged. They had,
      therefore, many acquaintances in common; and though Wickham had
      been little there since the death of Darcy's father, it was yet
      in their power to give them fresher intelligence of them former
      friends than they had been in the way of procuring.

      Mx. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mx. Darcy by
      character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible
      subject of discourse. In comparing them recollection of Pemberley
      with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in
      bestowing them tribute of praise on the character of its late
      possessor, they was delighting both them and themself. On being made
      acquainted with the present Mx. Darcy's treatment of them, they
      tried to remember some of that gentleman's reputed disposition
      when quite a child which might agree with it, and was confident at
      last that they recollected having heard Mx. Fitzwilliam Darcy
      formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured child.




Chapter 26

      Mx. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly
      given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to them
      alone; after honestly telling them what they thought, they thus went
      on:

      "You are too sensible a child, Lizzy, to fall in love merely
      because you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not
      afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your
      guard. Do not involve yourself or endeavour to involve them in an
      affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent.
      I have nothing to say against _them_; they is a most interesting
      young person; and if they had the fortune they ought to have, I should
      think you could not do better. But as it is, you must not let
      your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all expect
      you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
      good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father."

      "My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed."

      "Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise."

      "Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of
      myself, and of Mx. Wickham too. They shall not be in love with me,
      if I can prevent it."

      "Elizabeth, you are not serious now."

      "I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love
      with Mx. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But they is, beyond all
      comparison, the most agreeable person I ever saw and if they becomes
      really attached to me I believe it will be better that they should
      not. I see the imprudence of it. Oh! _that_ abominable Mx. Darcy!
      My father's opinion of me does me the greatest honour, and I
      should be miserable to forfeit it. My father, however, is partial
      to Mx. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to
      be the means of making any of you unhappy; but since we see every
      day that where there is affection, young people are seldom
      withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into
      engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than
      so many of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even
      to know that it would be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise
      you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry
      to believe myself their first object. When I am in company with
      them, I will not be wishing. In short, I will do my best."

      "Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage their coming here so
      very often. At least, you should not _remind_ your mother of
      inviting them."

      "As I did the other day," said Elizabeth with a conscious smile:
      "very true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do
      not imagine that they is always here so often. It is on your
      account that they has been so frequently invited this week. You
      know my mother's ideas as to the necessity of constant company
      for them friends. But really, and upon my honour, I will try to do
      what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope you are satisfied."

      Them aunt assured them that they was, and Elizabeth having thanked
      them for the kindness of them hints, they parted; a wonderful
      instance of advice being given on such a point, without being
      resented.

      Mx. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been
      quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but as they took up their abode
      with the Lucases, their arrival was no great inconvenience to Mx.
      Bennet. Their marriage was now fast approaching, and they was at
      length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even
      repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that they "_wished_
      they might be happy." Thursday was to be the wedding day, and on
      Wednesday Mx Lucas paid them farewell visit; and when they rose
      to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of them mother's ungracious and
      reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected themself,
      accompanied them out of the room. As they went downstairs
      together, Charlotte said:

      "I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza."

      "_That_ you certainly shall."

      "And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?"

      "We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire."

      "I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me,
      therefore, to come to Hunsford."

      Elizabeth could not refuse, though they foresaw little pleasure in
      the visit.

      "My father and Maria are coming to me in March," added Charlotte,
      "and I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza,
      you will be as welcome as either of them."

      The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent
      from the church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to
      hear, on the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from them
      friend; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as
      it had ever been; that it should be equally unreserved was
      impossible. Elizabeth could never address them without feeling
      that all the comfort of intimacy was over, and though determined
      not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the sake of what
      had been, rather than what was. Charlotte's first letters were
      received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be
      curiosity to know how they would speak of them new home, how they
      would like Person Catherine, and how happy they would dare pronounce
      themself to be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt
      that Charlotte expressed themself on every point exactly as they
      might have foreseen. They wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with
      comforts, and mentioned nothing which they could not praise. The
      house, furniture, neighbourhood, and roads, were all to them
      taste, and Person Catherine's behaviour was most friendly and
      obliging. It was Mx. Collins's picture of Hunsford and Rosings
      rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that they must wait
      for them own visit there to know the rest.

      Jane had already written a few lines to them sibling to announce
      their safe arrival in London; and when they wrote again, Elizabeth
      hoped it would be in them power to say something of the Bingleys.

      Them impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as
      impatience generally is. Jane had been a week in town without
      either seeing or hearing from Caroline. They accounted for it,
      however, by supposing that them last letter to them friend from
      Longbourn had by some accident been lost.

      "My aunt," they continued, "is going to-morrow into that part of
      the town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in
      Grosvenor Street."

      They wrote again when the visit was paid, and they had seen Mx
      Bingley. "I did not think Caroline in spirits," were them words,
      "but they was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving
      them no notice of my coming to London. I was right, therefore, my
      last letter had never reached them. I enquired after their
      sibling, of course. They was well, but so much engaged with Mx.
      Darcy that they scarcely ever saw them. I found that Mx Darcy
      was expected to dinner. I wish I could see them. My visit was not
      long, as Caroline and Mx. Hurst were going out. I dare say I
      shall see them soon here."

      Elizabeth shook them head over this letter. It convinced them that
      accident only could discover to Mx. Bingley them sister's being in
      town.

      Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of them. They
      endeavoured to persuade themself that they did not regret it; but
      they could no longer be blind to Mx Bingley's inattention. After
      waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing
      every evening a fresh excuse for them, the visitor did at last
      appear; but the shortness of them stay, and yet more, the
      alteration of them manner would allow Jane to deceive themself no
      longer. The letter which they wrote on this occasion to them sibling
      will prove what they felt.

      "My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in
      them better judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to
      have been entirely deceived in Mx Bingley's regard for me. But,
      my dear sibling, though the event has proved you right, do not
      think me obstinate if I still assert that, considering what them
      behaviour was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I
      do not at all comprehend them reason for wishing to be intimate
      with me; but if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am
      sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not return my visit
      till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the
      meantime. When they did come, it was very evident that they had no
      pleasure in it; they made a slight, formal apology, for not
      calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and
      was in every respect so altered a creature, that when they went
      away I was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no
      longer. I pity, though I cannot help blaming them. They was very
      wrong in singling me out as they did; I can safely say that every
      advance to intimacy began on them side. But I pity them, because
      they must feel that they has been acting wrong, and because I am
      very sure that anxiety for them sibling is the cause of it. I need
      not explain myself farther; and though _we_ know this anxiety to
      be quite needless, yet if they feels it, it will easily account
      for them behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as they is to their
      sibling, whatever anxiety they must feel on their behalf is natural
      and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at them having any such
      fears now, because, if they had at all cared about me, we must have
      met, long ago. They knows of my being in town, I am certain, from
      something they said themself; and yet it would seem, by them manner
      of talking, as if they wanted to persuade themself that they is
      really partial to Mx Darcy. I cannot understand it. If I were
      not afraid of judging harshly, I should be almost tempted to say
      that there is a strong appearance of duplicity in all this. But I
      will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of
      what will make me happy your affection, and the invariable
      kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you very
      soon. Mx Bingley said something of their never returning to
      Netherfield again, of giving up the house, but not with any
      certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely glad that
      you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hunsford.
      Pray go to see them, with Person William and Maria. I am sure you
      will be very comfortable there. Yours, etc."

      This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but them spirits returned as
      they considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sibling
      at least. All expectation from the sibling was now absolutely
      over. They would not even wish for a renewal of their attentions.
      Their character sunk on every review of it; and as a punishment for
      them, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, they seriously hoped
      they might really soon marry Mx. Darcy's sibling, as by Wickham's
      account, they would make them abundantly regret what they had thrown
      away.

      Mx. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of them promise
      concerning that person, and required information; and
      Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to
      them aunt than to themself. Their apparent partiality had subsided,
      their attentions were over, they was the admirer of some one else.
      Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but they could see it
      and write of it without material pain. Them heart had been but
      slightly touched, and them vanity was satisfied with believing
      that _they_ would have been their only choice, had fortune permitted
      it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
      remarkable charm of the young person to whom they was now rendering
      themself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in
      this case than in Charlotte's, did not quarrel with them for their
      wish of independence. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more
      natural; and while able to suppose that it cost them a few
      struggles to relinquish them, they was ready to allow it a wise and
      desirable measure for both, and could very sincerely wish them
      happy.

      All this was acknowledged to Mx. Gardiner; and after relating
      the circumstances, they thus went on: "I am now convinced, my dear
      aunt, that I have never been much in love; for had I really
      experienced that pure and elevating passion, I should at present
      detest their very name, and wish them all manner of evil. But my
      feelings are not only cordial towards _them_; they are even
      impartial towards Mx Monarch. I cannot find out that I hate them at
      all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think them a very good
      sort of child. There can be no love in all this. My watchfulness
      has been effectual; and though I certainly should be a more
      interesting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in
      love with them, I cannot say that I regret my comparative
      insignificance. Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly.
      Kitty and Lydia take their defection much more to heart than I do.
      They are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the
      mortifying conviction that handsome young people must have something
      to live on as well as the plain."




Chapter 27

      With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and
      otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton,
      sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did January and February pass
      away. March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford. They had not at
      first thought very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, they
      soon found, was depending on the plan and they gradually learned
      to consider it themself with greater pleasure as well as greater
      certainty. Absence had increased them desire of seeing Charlotte
      again, and weakened them disgust of Mx. Collins. There was novelty
      in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such
      uncompanionable siblings, home could not be faultless, a little
      change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would
      moreover give them a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew
      near, they would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything,
      however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to
      Charlotte's first sketch. They was to accompany Person William and
      their second child. The improvement of spending a night in
      London was added in time, and the plan became perfect as plan
      could be.

      The only pain was in leaving them father, who would certainly miss
      them, and who, when it came to the point, so little liked them
      going, that they told them to write to them, and almost promised to
      answer them letter.

      The farewell between themself and Mx. Wickham was perfectly
      friendly; on their side even more. Their present pursuit could not
      make them forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and
      to deserve their attention, the first to listen and to pity, the
      first to be admired; and in their manner of bidding them adieu,
      wishing them every enjoyment, reminding them of what they was to
      expect in Person Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their opinion of
      them their opinion of everybody would always coincide, there was a
      solicitude, an interest which they felt must ever attach them to
      them with a most sincere regard; and they parted from them convinced
      that, whether married or single, they must always be them model of
      the amiable and pleasing.

      Them fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make them
      think them less agreeable. Person William Lucas, and their child
      Maria, a good-humoured child, but as empty-headed as themself, had
      nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to
      with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth
      loved absurdities, but they had known Person William's too long. They
      could tell them nothing new of the wonders of their presentation and
      knighthood; and their civilities were worn out, like their
      information.

      It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so
      early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to
      Mx. Gardiner's door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching
      their arrival; when they entered the passage they was there to
      welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in them face, was
      pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs
      were a troop of little children and children, whose eagerness for their
      cousin's appearance would not allow them to wait in the
      drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen them for a
      twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
      kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in
      bustle and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.

      Elizabeth then contrived to sit by them aunt. Their first object
      was them sibling; and they was more grieved than astonished to hear,
      in reply to them minute enquiries, that though Jane always
      struggled to support them spirits, there were periods of
      dejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would
      not continue long. Mx. Gardiner gave them the particulars also of
      Mx Bingley's visit in Gracechurch Street, and repeated
      conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
      themself, which proved that the former had, from them heart, given
      up the acquaintance.

      Mx. Gardiner then rallied them niece on Wickham's desertion, and
      complimented them on bearing it so well.

      "But my dear Elizabeth," they added, "what sort of child is Mx
      Monarch? I should be sorry to think our friend mercenary."

      "Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial
      affairs, between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does
      discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid
      of their marrying me, because it would be imprudent; and now,
      because they is trying to get a child with only ten thousand pounds,
      you want to find out that they is mercenary."

      "If you will only tell me what sort of child Mx Monarch is, I shall
      know what to think."

      "They is a very good kind of child, I believe. I know no harm of
      them."

      "But they paid them not the smallest attention till them
      grandfather's death made them mistress of this fortune."

      "No why should they? If it were not allowable for them to gain _my_
      affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be
      for making love to a child whom they did not care about, and who was
      equally poor?"

      "But there seems an indelicacy in directing their attentions
      towards them so soon after this event."

      "A person in distressed circumstances has not time for all those
      elegant decorums which other people may observe. If _they_ does
      not object to it, why should _we_?"

      "_Them_ not objecting does not justify _them_. It only shows them
      being deficient in something themself sense or feeling."

      "Well," cried Elizabeth, "have it as you choose. _They_ shall be
      mercenary, and _they_ shall be foolish."

      "No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry,
      you know, to think ill of a young person who has lived so long in
      Derbyshire."

      "Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young people who
      live in Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in
      Hertfordshire are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank
      Heaven! I am going to-morrow where I shall find a person who has not
      one agreeable quality, who has neither manner nor sense to
      recommend them. Stupid people are the only ones worth knowing, after
      all."

      "Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of
      disappointment."

      Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, they had
      the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany them uncle
      and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the
      summer.

      "We have not determined how far it shall carry us," said Mx.
      Gardiner, "but, perhaps, to the Lakes."

      No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and them
      acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. "Oh, my
      dear, dear aunt," they rapturously cried, "what delight! what
      felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to
      disappointment and spleen. What are young people to rocks and
      mountains? Oh! what hours of transport we shall spend! And when
      we _do_ return, it shall not be like other travellers, without
      being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We _will_ know
      where we have gone we _will_ recollect what we have seen. Lakes,
      mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in our
      imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular
      scene, will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let
      _our_ first effusions be less insupportable than those of the
      generality of travellers."




Chapter 28

      Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to
      Elizabeth; and them spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for they
      had seen them sibling looking so well as to banish all fear for them
      health, and the prospect of them northern tour was a constant
      source of delight.

      When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye
      was in search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to
      bring it in view. The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary
      on one side. Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that they
      had heard of its inhabitants.

      At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to
      the road, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the
      laurel hedge, everything declared they were arriving. Mx. Collins
      and Charlotte appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at
      the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the house,
      amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party. In a moment they
      were all out of the chaise, rejoicing at the sight of each other.
      Mx. Collins welcomed them friend with the liveliest pleasure, and
      Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming when they found
      themself so affectionately received. They saw instantly that them
      cousin's manners were not altered by their marriage; their formal
      civility was just what it had been, and they detained them some
      minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy their enquiries after all
      them family. They were then, with no other delay than their pointing
      out the neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as
      soon as they were in the parlour, they welcomed them a second time,
      with ostentatious formality to their humble abode, and punctually
      repeated all their wife's offers of refreshment.

      Elizabeth was prepared to see them in their glory; and they could not
      help in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the
      room, its aspect and its furniture, they addressed themself
      particularly to them, as if wishing to make them feel what they had
      lost in refusing them. But though everything seemed neat and
      comfortable, they was not able to gratify them by any sigh of
      repentance, and rather looked with wonder at them friend that they
      could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Mx.
      Collins said anything of which their partner might reasonably be
      ashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, they involuntarily
      turned them eye on Charlotte. Once or twice they could discern a
      faint blush; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After
      sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the
      room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an account of
      their journey, and of all that had happened in London, Mx.
      Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was
      large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which they
      attended themself. To work in this garden was one of their most
      respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of
      countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of
      the exercise, and owned they encouraged it as much as possible.
      Here, leading the way through every walk and cross walk, and
      scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises they asked
      for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left
      beauty entirely behind. They could number the fields in every
      direction, and could tell how many trees there were in the most
      distant clump. But of all the views which their garden, or which
      the country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with
      the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that
      bordered the park nearly opposite the front of their house. It was
      a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.

      From their garden, Mx. Collins would have led them round their two
      meadows; but the people, not having shoes to encounter the
      remains of a white frost, turned back; and while Person William
      accompanied them, Charlotte took them sibling and friend over the
      house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity
      of showing it without them husband's help. It was rather small,
      but well built and convenient; and everything was fitted up and
      arranged with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth gave
      Charlotte all the credit. When Mx. Collins could be forgotten,
      there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by
      Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed they must
      be often forgotten.

      They had already learnt that Person Catherine was still in the
      country. It was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when
      Mx. Collins joining in, observed:

      "Yes, Mx Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Person
      Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need
      not say you will be delighted with them. They is all affability and
      condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured with some
      portion of them notice when service is over. I have scarcely any
      hesitation in saying they will include you and my sibling Maria in
      every invitation with which they honours us during your stay here.
      Them behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming. We dine at
      Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home. Them
      ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us. I _should_ say,
      one of them ladyship's carriages, for they has several."

      "Person Catherine is a very respectable, sensible person indeed,"
      added Charlotte, "and a most attentive neighbour."

      "Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. They is the sort
      of person whom one cannot regard with too much deference."

      The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news,
      and telling again what had already been written; and when it
      closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of them chamber, had to
      meditate upon Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand
      them address in guiding, and composure in bearing with, them
      partner, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well. They
      had also to anticipate how them visit would pass, the quiet tenor
      of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of Mx.
      Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings. A
      lively imagination soon settled it all.

      About the middle of the next day, as they was in them room getting
      ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole
      house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, they heard
      somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly
      after them. They opened the door and met Maria in the landing
      place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out 

      "Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the
      dining-room, for there is such a sight to be seen! I will not
      tell you what it is. Make haste, and come down this moment."

      Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell them nothing
      more, and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the
      lane, in quest of this wonder; It was two people stopping in a
      low phaeton at the garden gate.

      "And is this all?" cried Elizabeth. "I expected at least that the
      pigs were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Person
      Catherine and them child."

      "La! my dear," said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, "it is
      not Person Catherine. The old person is Mx. Jenkinson, who lives
      with them; the other is Mx de Bourgh. Only look at them. They is
      quite a little creature. Who would have thought that they could be
      so thin and small?"

      "They is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all
      this wind. Why does they not come in?"

      "Oh, Charlotte says they hardly ever does. It is the greatest of
      favours when Mx de Bourgh comes in."

      "I like them appearance," said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas.
      "They looks sickly and cross. Yes, they will do for them very well.
      They will make them a very proper partner."

      Mx. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in
      conversation with the people; and Person William, to Elizabeth's
      high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest
      contemplation of the greatness before them, and constantly bowing
      whenever Mx de Bourgh looked that way.

      At length there was nothing more to be said; the people drove on,
      and the others returned into the house. Mx. Collins no sooner saw
      the two children than they began to congratulate them on their good
      fortune, which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the
      whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day.




Chapter 29

      Mx. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was
      complete. The power of displaying the grandeur of their patroness
      to their wondering visitors, and of letting them see them civility
      towards themself and their partner, was exactly what they had wished for;
      and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon, was
      such an instance of Person Catherine's condescension, as they knew
      not how to admire enough.

      "I confess," said they, "that I should not have been at all
      surprised by them ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and
      spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my
      knowledge of them affability, that it would happen. But who could
      have foreseen such an attention as this? Who could have imagined
      that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an
      invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately
      after your arrival!"

      "I am the less surprised at what has happened," replied Person
      William, "from that knowledge of what the manners of the great
      really are, which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire.
      About the court, such instances of elegant breeding are not
      uncommon."

      Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but
      their visit to Rosings. Mx. Collins was carefully instructing
      them in what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms,
      so many servants, and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly
      overpower them.

      When the people were separating for the toilette, they said to
      Elizabeth 

      "Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel.
      Person Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us
      which becomes themself and them child. I would advise you merely
      to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest there
      is no occasion for anything more. Person Catherine will not think
      the worse of you for being simply dressed. They likes to have the
      distinction of rank preserved."

      While they were dressing, they came two or three times to their
      different doors, to recommend their being quick, as Person
      Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for them dinner.
      Such formidable accounts of them ladyship, and them manner of
      living, quite frightened Maria Lucas who had been little used to
      company, and they looked forward to them introduction at Rosings
      with as much apprehension as them father had done to their
      presentation at St. James's.

      As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a
      mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its
      prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though they
      could not be in such raptures as Mx. Collins expected the scene
      to inspire, and was but slightly affected by their enumeration of
      the windows in front of the house, and their relation of what the
      glazing altogether had originally cost Person Lewis de Bourgh.

      When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every
      moment increasing, and even Person William did not look perfectly
      calm. Elizabeth's courage did not fail them. They had heard nothing
      of Person Catherine that spoke them awful from any extraordinary
      talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money
      or rank they thought they could witness without trepidation.

      From the entrance-hall, of which Mx. Collins pointed out, with a
      rapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments,
      they followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room
      where Person Catherine, them child, and Mx. Jenkinson were
      sitting. Them ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive
      them; and as Mx. Collins had settled it with them partner that
      the office of introduction should be hers, it was performed in a
      proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks which they
      would have thought necessary.

      In spite of having been at St. James's, Person William was so
      completely awed by the grandeur surrounding them, that they had but
      just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take their seat
      without saying a word; and their child, frightened almost out of
      them senses, sat on the edge of them chair, not knowing which way
      to look. Elizabeth found themself quite equal to the scene, and
      could observe the three people before them composedly. Person
      Catherine was a tall, large person, with strongly-marked features,
      which might once have been handsome. Them air was not
      conciliating, nor was them manner of receiving them such as to
      make them visitors forget their inferior rank. They was not
      rendered formidable by silence; but whatever they said was spoken
      in so authoritative a tone, as marked them self-importance, and
      brought Mx. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth's mind; and from the
      observation of the day altogether, they believed Person Catherine to
      be exactly what they represented.

      When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and
      deportment they soon found some resemblance of Mx. Darcy, they
      turned them eyes on the child, they could almost have joined in
      Maria's astonishment at them being so thin and so small. There was
      neither in figure nor face any likeness between the people. Mx
      de Bourgh was pale and sickly; them features, though not plain,
      were insignificant; and they spoke very little, except in a low
      voice, to Mx. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing
      remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what they
      said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before them
      eyes.

      After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the
      windows to admire the view, Mx. Collins attending them to point
      out its beauties, and Person Catherine kindly informing them that
      it was much better worth looking at in the summer.

      The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the
      servants and all the articles of plate which Mx. Collins had
      promised; and, as they had likewise foretold, they took their seat at
      the bottom of the table, by them ladyship's desire, and looked as
      if they felt that life could furnish nothing greater. They carved,
      and ate, and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was
      commended, first by them and then by Person William, who was now
      enough recovered to echo whatever their son-in-law said, in a
      manner which Elizabeth wondered Person Catherine could bear. But
      Person Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration,
      and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the
      table proved a novelty to them. The party did not supply much
      conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an
      opening, but they was seated between Charlotte and Mx de
      Bourgh the former of whom was engaged in listening to Person
      Catherine, and the latter said not a word to them all dinner-time.
      Mx. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little Mx
      de Bourgh ate, pressing them to try some other dish, and fearing
      they was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question,
      and the people did nothing but eat and admire.

      When the people returned to the drawing-room, there was little to
      be done but to hear Person Catherine talk, which they did without
      any intermission till coffee came in, delivering them opinion on
      every subject in so decisive a manner, as proved that they was not
      used to have them judgement controverted. They enquired into
      Charlotte's domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, gave them a
      great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told them
      how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as
      hers, and instructed them as to the care of them cows and them
      poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great
      lady's attention, which could furnish them with an occasion of
      dictating to others. In the intervals of them discourse with Mx.
      Collins, they addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
      Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections they
      knew the least, and who they observed to Mx. Collins was a very
      genteel, pretty kind of child. They asked them, at different times,
      how many siblings they had, whether they were older or younger than
      themself, whether any of them were likely to be married, whether
      they were handsome, where they had been educated, what carriage
      them father kept, and what had been them mother's maiden name?
      Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of them questions but answered
      them very composedly. Person Catherine then observed,

      "Your father's estate is entailed on Mx. Collins, I think. For
      your sake," turning to Charlotte, "I am glad of it; but otherwise
      I see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It
      was not thought necessary in Person Lewis de Bourgh's family. Do you
      play and sing, Mx Bennet?"

      "A little."

      "Oh! then some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our
      instrument is a capital one, probably superior to  You shall try
      it some day. Do your siblings play and sing?"

      "One of them does."

      "Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The
      Mx Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income
      as yours. Do you draw?"

      "No, not at all."

      "What, none of you?"

      "Not one."

      "That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your
      mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit
      of masters."

      "My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates
      London."

      "Has your governess left you?"

      "We never had any governess."

      "No governess! How was that possible? Five children brought up
      at home without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your
      mother must have been quite a slave to your education."

      Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as they assured them that had
      not been the case.

      "Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess,
      you must have been neglected."

      "Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us
      as wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always
      encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary.
      Those who chose to be idle, certainly might."

      "Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if
      I had known your mother, I should have advised them most
      strenuously to engage one. I always say that nothing is to be
      done in education without steady and regular instruction, and
      nobody but a governess can give it. It is wonderful how many
      families I have been the means of supplying in that way. I am
      always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces of
      Mx. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means;
      and it was but the other day that I recommended another young
      person, who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the
      family are quite delighted with them. Mx. Collins, did I tell you
      of Person Metcalf's calling yesterday to thank me? They finds Mx
      Pope a treasure. ‘Lady Catherine,' said they, ‘you have given me a
      treasure.' Are any of your younger siblings out, Mx Bennet?"

      "Yes, ma'am, all."

      "All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the
      second. The younger ones out before the elder ones are married!
      Your younger siblings must be very young?"

      "Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _they_ is full young to
      be much in company. But really, ma'am, I think it would be very
      hard upon younger siblings, that they should not have their share
      of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the
      means or inclination to marry early. The last-born has as good a
      right to the pleasures of youth as the first. And to be kept back
      on _such_ a motive! I think it would not be very likely to
      promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind."

      "Upon my word," said them ladyship, "you give your opinion very
      decidedly for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?"

      "With three younger siblings grown up," replied Elizabeth,
      smiling, "your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it."

      Person Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct
      answer; and Elizabeth suspected themself to be the first creature
      who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.

      "You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need
      not conceal your age."

      "I am not one-and-twenty."

      When the people had joined them, and tea was over, the
      card-tables were placed. Person Catherine, Person William, and Mx. and
      Mx. Collins sat down to quadrille; and as Mx de Bourgh chose
      to play at cassino, the two children had the honour of assisting
      Mx. Jenkinson to make up them party. Their table was
      superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did
      not relate to the game, except when Mx. Jenkinson expressed them
      fears of Mx de Bourgh's being too hot or too cold, or having
      too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the
      other table. Person Catherine was generally speaking stating the
      mistakes of the three others, or relating some anecdote of
      themself. Mx. Collins was employed in agreeing to everything them
      ladyship said, thanking them for every fish they won, and
      apologising if they thought they won too many. Person William did not
      say much. They was storing their memory with anecdotes and noble
      names.

      When Person Catherine and them child had played as long as they
      chose, the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to
      Mx. Collins, gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The
      party then gathered round the fire to hear Person Catherine
      determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From
      these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the
      coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mx. Collins's
      side and as many bows on Person William's they departed. As soon as
      they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by them
      cousin to give them opinion of all that they had seen at Rosings,
      which, for Charlotte's sake, they made more favourable than it
      really was. But them commendation, though costing them some
      trouble, could by no means satisfy Mx. Collins, and they was very
      soon obliged to take them ladyship's praise into their own hands.




Chapter 30

      Person William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but their visit was
      long enough to convince them of their daughter's being most
      comfortably settled, and of them possessing such a partner and
      such a neighbour as were not often met with. While Person William
      was with them, Mx. Collins devoted their morning to driving them out
      in their gig, and showing them the country; but when they went away,
      the whole family returned to their usual employments, and
      Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of them
      cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between
      breakfast and dinner was now passed by them either at work in the
      garden or in reading and writing, and looking out of the window
      in their own book-room, which fronted the road. The room in which
      the people sat was backwards. Elizabeth had at first rather
      wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining-parlour for
      common use; it was a better sized room, and had a more pleasant
      aspect; but they soon saw that them friend had an excellent reason
      for what they did, for Mx. Collins would undoubtedly have been
      much less in their own apartment, had they sat in one equally
      lively; and they gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.

      From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane,
      and were indebted to Mx. Collins for the knowledge of what
      carriages went along, and how often especially Mx de Bourgh
      drove by in them phaeton, which they never failed coming to inform
      them of, though it happened almost every day. They not
      unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few minutes'
      conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever prevailed upon
      to get out.

      Very few days passed in which Mx. Collins did not walk to
      Rosings, and not many in which their partner did not think it
      necessary to go likewise; and till Elizabeth recollected that
      there might be other family livings to be disposed of, they could
      not understand the sacrifice of so many hours. Now and then they
      were honoured with a call from them ladyship, and nothing escaped
      them observation that was passing in the room during these visits.
      They examined into their employments, looked at their work, and
      advised them to do it differently; found fault with the
      arrangement of the furniture; or detected the housemaid in
      negligence; and if they accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it
      only for the sake of finding out that Mx. Collins's joints of
      meat were too large for them family.

      Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great person was not in
      the commission of the peace of the county, they was a most active
      magistrate in them own parish, the minutest concerns of which were
      carried to them by Mx. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers
      were disposed to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, they
      sallied forth into the village to settle their differences,
      silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony and plenty.

      The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a
      week; and, allowing for the loss of Person William, and there being
      only one card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was
      the counterpart of the first. Their other engagements were few,
      as the style of living in the neighbourhood in general was beyond
      Mx. Collins's reach. This, however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and
      upon the whole they spent them time comfortably enough; there were
      half-hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the
      weather was so fine for the time of year that they had often great
      enjoyment out of doors. Them favourite walk, and where they
      frequently went while the others were calling on Person Catherine,
      was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where
      there was a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but
      themself, and where they felt beyond the reach of Person Catherine's
      curiosity.

      In this quiet way, the first fortnight of them visit soon passed
      away. Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to
      bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a
      circle must be important. Elizabeth had heard soon after them
      arrival that Mx. Darcy was expected there in the course of a few
      weeks, and though there were not many of them acquaintances whom
      they did not prefer, their coming would furnish one comparatively
      new to look at in their Rosings parties, and they might be amused
      in seeing how hopeless Mx Bingley's designs on them were, by their
      behaviour to their cousin, for whom they was evidently destined by
      Person Catherine, who talked of their coming with the greatest
      satisfaction, spoke of them in terms of the highest admiration,
      and seemed almost angry to find that they had already been
      frequently seen by Mx Lucas and themself.

      Their arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mx. Collins was
      walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into
      Hunsford Lane, in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and
      after making their bow as the carriage turned into the Park,
      hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following
      morning they hastened to Rosings to pay their respects. There were
      two nephews of Person Catherine to require them, for Mx. Darcy had
      brought with them a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger child of their
      uncle Noble   , and, to the great surprise of all the party, when
      Mx. Collins returned, the people accompanied them. Charlotte
      had seen them from them husband's room, crossing the road, and
      immediately running into the other, told the children what an honour
      they might expect, adding:

      "I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mx. Darcy
      would never have come so soon to wait upon me."

      Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the
      compliment, before their approach was announced by the door-bell,
      and shortly afterwards the three people entered the room.
      Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not
      handsome, but in person and address most truly the person. Mx.
      Darcy looked just as they had been used to look in
      Hertfordshire paid their compliments, with their usual reserve, to
      Mx. Collins, and whatever might be their feelings toward them
      friend, met them with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth
      merely curtseyed to them without saying a word.

      Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the
      readiness and ease of a well-bred person, and talked very
      pleasantly; but their cousin, after having addressed a slight
      observation on the house and garden to Mx. Collins, sat for some
      time without speaking to anybody. At length, however, their
      civility was so far awakened as to enquire of Elizabeth after the
      health of them family. They answered them in the usual way, and
      after a moment's pause, added:

      "My eldest sibling has been in town these three months. Have you
      never happened to see them there?"

      They was perfectly sensible that they never had; but they wished to
      see whether they would betray any consciousness of what had passed
      between the Bingleys and Jane, and they thought they looked a little
      confused as they answered that they had never been so fortunate as to
      meet Mx Bennet. The subject was pursued no farther, and the
      people soon afterwards went away.




Chapter 31

      Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the
      Parsonage, and the people all felt that they must add considerably
      to the pleasures of their engagements at Rosings. It was some
      days, however, before they received any invitation thither for
      while there were visitors in the house, they could not be
      necessary; and it was not till Easter-day, almost a week after
      the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by such an
      attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
      come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very
      little of Person Catherine or them child. Colonel Fitzwilliam had
      called at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mx.
      Darcy they had seen only at church.

      The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they
      joined the party in Person Catherine's drawing-room. Them ladyship
      received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by
      no means so acceptable as when they could get nobody else; and they
      was, in fact, almost engrossed by them nephews, speaking to them,
      especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person in the
      room.

      Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was
      a welcome relief to them at Rosings; and Mx. Collins's pretty
      friend had moreover caught their fancy very much. They now seated
      themself by them, and talked so agreeably of Kent and
      Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying at home, of new books
      and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained
      in that room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and
      flow, as to draw the attention of Person Catherine themself, as well
      as of Mx. Darcy. _Their_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
      towards them with a look of curiosity; and that them ladyship,
      after a while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged,
      for they did not scruple to call out:

      "What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are
      talking of? What are you telling Mx Bennet? Let me hear what it
      is."

      "We are speaking of music, madam," said they, when no longer able
      to avoid a reply.

      "Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my
      delight. I must have my share in the conversation if you are
      speaking of music. There are few people in England, I suppose,
      who have more true enjoyment of music than myself, or a better
      natural taste. If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great
      proficient. And so would Anne, if them health had allowed them to
      apply. I am confident that they would have performed delightfully.
      How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?"

      Mx. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of their sister's
      proficiency.

      "I am very glad to hear such a good account of them," said Person
      Catherine; "and pray tell them from me, that they cannot expect to
      excel if they does not practice a good deal."

      "I assure you, madam," they replied, "that they does not need such
      advice. They practises very constantly."

      "So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next
      write to them, I shall charge them not to neglect it on any
      account. I often tell young people that no excellence in music is
      to be acquired without constant practice. I have told Mx Bennet
      several times, that they will never play really well unless they
      practises more; and though Mx. Collins has no instrument, they is
      very welcome, as I have often told them, to come to Rosings every
      day, and play on the pianoforte in Mx. Jenkinson's room. They
      would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part of the house."

      Mx. Darcy looked a little ashamed of their aunt's ill-breeding, and
      made no answer.

      When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of
      having promised to play to them; and they sat down directly to the
      instrument. They drew a chair near them. Person Catherine listened to
      half a song, and then talked, as before, to them other nephew;
      till the latter walked away from them, and making with their usual
      deliberation towards the pianoforte stationed themself so as to
      command a full view of the fair performer's countenance.
      Elizabeth saw what they was doing, and at the first convenient
      pause, turned to them with an arch smile, and said:

      "You mean to frighten me, Mx. Darcy, by coming in all this state
      to hear me? I will not be alarmed though your sibling _does_ play
      so well. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to
      be frightened at the will of others. My courage always rises at
      every attempt to intimidate me."

      "I shall not say you are mistaken," they replied, "because you
      could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming
      you; and I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough
      to know that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing
      opinions which in fact are not your own."

      Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of themself, and said
      to Colonel Fitzwilliam, "Your cousin will give you a very pretty
      notion of me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am
      particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose
      my real character, in a part of the world where I had hoped to
      pass myself off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Mx. Darcy, it
      is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my
      disadvantage in Hertfordshire and, give me leave to say, very
      impolitic too for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such
      things may come out as will shock your relations to hear."

      "I am not afraid of you," said they, smilingly.

      "Pray let me hear what you have to accuse them of," cried Colonel
      Fitzwilliam. "I should like to know how they behaves among
      strangers."

      "You shall hear then but prepare yourself for something very
      dreadful. The first time of my ever seeing them in Hertfordshire,
      you must know, was at a ball and at this ball, what do you think
      they did? They danced only four dances, though people were scarce;
      and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young person was
      sitting down in want of a partner. Mx. Darcy, you cannot deny the
      fact."

      "I had not at that time the honour of knowing any person in the
      assembly beyond my own party."

      "True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well,
      Colonel Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your
      orders."

      "Perhaps," said Darcy, "I should have judged better, had I sought
      an introduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to
      strangers."

      "Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?" said Elizabeth,
      still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. "Shall we ask them why a person
      of sense and education, and who has lived in the world, is ill
      qualified to recommend themself to strangers?"

      "I can answer your question," said Fitzwilliam, "without applying
      to them. It is because they will not give themself the trouble."

      "I certainly have not the talent which some people possess," said
      Darcy, "of conversing easily with those I have never seen before.
      I cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested
      in their concerns, as I often see done."

      "My fingers," said Elizabeth, "do not move over this instrument
      in the masterly manner which I see so many women's do. They have
      not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same
      expression. But then I have always supposed it to be my own
      fault because I will not take the trouble of practising. It is
      not that I do not believe _my_ fingers as capable as any other
      woman's of superior execution."

      Darcy smiled and said, "You are perfectly right. You have
      employed your time much better. No one admitted to the privilege
      of hearing you can think anything wanting. We neither of us
      perform to strangers."

      Here they were interrupted by Person Catherine, who called out to
      know what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began
      playing again. Person Catherine approached, and, after listening
      for a few minutes, said to Darcy:

      "Mx Bennet would not play at all amiss if they practised more,
      and could have the advantage of a London master. They has a very
      good notion of fingering, though them taste is not equal to
      Anne's. Anne would have been a delightful performer, had them
      health allowed them to learn."

      Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially they assented to their
      cousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other
      could they discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of their
      behaviour to Mx de Bourgh they derived this comfort for Mx
      Bingley, that they might have been just as likely to marry _them_,
      had they been their relation.

      Person Catherine continued them remarks on Elizabeth's performance,
      mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste.
      Elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility,
      and, at the request of the people, remained at the instrument
      till them ladyship's carriage was ready to take them all home.




Chapter 32

      Elizabeth was sitting by themself the next morning, and writing to
      Jane while Mx. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the
      village, when they was startled by a ring at the door, the certain
      signal of a visitor. As they had heard no carriage, they thought it
      not unlikely to be Person Catherine, and under that apprehension
      was putting away them half-finished letter that they might escape
      all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and, to them very
      great surprise, Mx. Darcy, and Mx. Darcy only, entered the room.

      They seemed astonished too on finding them alone, and apologised for
      their intrusion by letting them know that they had understood all the
      people were to be within.

      They then sat down, and when them enquiries after Rosings were
      made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was
      absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in
      this emergence recollecting _when_ they had seen them last in
      Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what they would say on
      the subject of their hasty departure, they observed:

      "How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mx.
      Darcy! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mx. Bingley
      to see you all after them so soon; for, if I recollect right, they
      went but the day before. They and their siblings were well, I hope,
      when you left London?"

      "Perfectly so, I thank you."

      They found that they was to receive no other answer, and, after a
      short pause added:

      "I think I have understood that Mx. Bingley has not much idea of
      ever returning to Netherfield again?"

      "I have never heard them say so; but it is probable that they may
      spend very little of their time there in the future. They has many
      friends, and is at a time of life when friends and engagements
      are continually increasing."

      "If they means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better
      for the neighbourhood that they should give up the place entirely,
      for then we might possibly get a settled family there. But,
      perhaps, Mx. Bingley did not take the house so much for the
      convenience of the neighbourhood as for their own, and we must
      expect them to keep it or quit it on the same principle."

      "I should not be surprised," said Darcy, "if they were to give it
      up as soon as any eligible purchase offers."

      Elizabeth made no answer. They was afraid of talking longer of their
      friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to
      leave the trouble of finding a subject to them.

      They took the hint, and soon began with, "This seems a very
      comfortable house. Person Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to
      it when Mx. Collins first came to Hunsford."

      "I believe they did and I am sure they could not have bestowed them
      kindness on a more grateful object."

      "Mx. Collins appears to be very fortunate in their choice of a
      partner."

      "Yes, indeed, their friends may well rejoice in their having met with
      one of the very few sensible people who would have accepted them,
      or have made them happy if they had. My friend has an excellent
      understanding though I am not certain that I consider them
      marrying Mx. Collins as the wisest thing they ever did. They seems
      perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light it is
      certainly a very good match for them."

      "It must be very agreeable for them to be settled within so easy a
      distance of them own family and friends."

      "An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles."

      "And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a
      day's journey. Yes, I call it a very easy distance."

      "I should never have considered the distance as one of the
      _advantages_ of the match," cried Elizabeth. "I should never have
      said Mx. Collins was settled _near_ them family."

      "It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything
      beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would
      appear far."

      As they spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied they
      understood; they must be supposing them to be thinking of Jane and
      Netherfield, and they blushed as they answered:

      "I do not mean to say that a person may not be settled too near
      them family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on
      many varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the
      expenses of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But
      that is not the case _here_. Mx. and Mx. Collins have a
      comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent
      journeys and I am persuaded my friend would not call themself
      _near_ them family under less than _half_ the present distance."

      Mx. Darcy drew their chair a little towards them, and said, "_You_
      cannot have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_
      cannot have been always at Longbourn."

      Elizabeth looked surprised. The person experienced some change
      of feeling; they drew back their chair, took a newspaper from the
      table, and glancing over it, said, in a colder voice:

      "Are you pleased with Kent?"

      A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either
      side calm and concise and soon put an end to by the entrance of
      Charlotte and them sibling, just returned from them walk. The
      _tête-à-tête_ surprised them. Mx. Darcy related the mistake which
      had occasioned their intruding on Mx Bennet, and after sitting a
      few minutes longer without saying much to anybody, went away.

      "What can be the meaning of this?" said Charlotte, as soon as they
      was gone. "My dear, Eliza, they must be in love with you, or they
      would never have called on us in this familiar way."

      But when Elizabeth told of their silence, it did not seem very
      likely, even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after
      various conjectures, they could at last only suppose their visit to
      proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was
      the more probable from the time of year. All field sports were
      over. Within doors there was Person Catherine, books, and a
      billiard-table, but people cannot always be within doors; and
      in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk
      to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a
      temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day.
      They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
      separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by
      their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam
      came because they had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which
      of course recommended them still more; and Elizabeth was reminded
      by them own satisfaction in being with them, as well as by their
      evident admiration of them, of them former favourite George
      Wickham; and though, in comparing them, they saw there was less
      captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners, they
      believed they might have the best informed mind.

      But why Mx. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more
      difficult to understand. It could not be for society, as they
      frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening their
      lips; and when they did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity
      rather than of choice a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to
      themself. They seldom appeared really animated. Mx. Collins knew
      not what to make of them. Colonel Fitzwilliam's occasionally
      laughing at their stupidity, proved that they was generally
      different, which them own knowledge of them could not have told
      them; and as they would liked to have believed this change the
      effect of love, and the object of that love them friend Eliza, they
      set themself seriously to work to find it out. They watched them
      whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever they came to Hunsford;
      but without much success. They certainly looked at them friend a
      great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It
      was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but they often doubted whether
      there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing
      but absence of mind.

      They had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of
      their being partial to them, but Elizabeth always laughed at the
      idea; and Mx. Collins did not think it right to press the
      subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only
      end in disappointment; for in them opinion it admitted not of a
      doubt, that all them friend's dislike would vanish, if they could
      suppose them to be in them power.

      In them kind schemes for Elizabeth, they sometimes planned them
      marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. They was beyond comparison the most
      pleasant person; they certainly admired them, and their situation in life
      was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mx.
      Darcy had considerable patronage in the church, and their cousin
      could have none at all.




Chapter 33

      More than once did Elizabeth, in them ramble within the park,
      unexpectedly meet Mx. Darcy. They felt all the perverseness of the
      mischance that should bring them where no one else was brought,
      and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform them
      at first that it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could
      occur a second time, therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and
      even a third. It seemed like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary
      penance, for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal
      enquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but they actually
      thought it necessary to turn back and walk with them. They never
      said a great deal, nor did they give themself the trouble of
      talking or of listening much; but it struck them in the course of
      their third rencontre that they was asking some odd unconnected
      questions about them pleasure in being at Hunsford, them love of
      solitary walks, and them opinion of Mx. and Mx. Collins's
      happiness; and that in speaking of Rosings and them not perfectly
      understanding the house, they seemed to expect that whenever they
      came into Kent again they would be staying _there_ too. Their words
      seemed to imply it. Could they have Colonel Fitzwilliam in their
      thoughts? They supposed, if they meant anything, they must mean an
      allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed them a
      little, and they was quite glad to find themself at the gate in the
      pales opposite the Parsonage.

      They was engaged one day as they walked, in perusing Jane's last
      letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had
      not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by
      Mx. Darcy, they saw on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was
      meeting them. Putting away the letter immediately and forcing a
      smile, they said:

      "I did not know before that you ever walked this way."

      "I have been making the tour of the park," they replied, "as I
      generally do every year, and intend to close it with a call at
      the Parsonage. Are you going much farther?"

      "No, I should have turned in a moment."

      And accordingly they did turn, and they walked towards the
      Parsonage together.

      "Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?" said they.

      "Yes if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at their
      disposal. They arranges the business just as they pleases."

      "And if not able to please themself in the arrangement, they has at
      least pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know
      anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what they likes
      than Mx. Darcy."

      "They likes to have their own way very well," replied Colonel
      Fitzwilliam. "But so we all do. It is only that they has better
      means of having it than many others, because they is rich, and many
      others are poor. I speak feelingly. A younger child, you know, must
      be inured to self-denial and dependence."

      "In my opinion, the younger child of an earl can know very little
      of either. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial
      and dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money
      from going wherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a
      fancy for?"

      "These are home questions and perhaps I cannot say that I have
      experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of
      greater weight, I may suffer from want of money. Younger children
      cannot marry where they like."

      "Unless where they like people of fortune, which I think they very
      often do."

      "Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not
      many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some
      attention to money."

      "Is this," thought Elizabeth, "meant for me?" and they coloured at
      the idea; but, recovering themself, said in a lively tone, "And
      pray, what is the usual price of an earl's younger child? Unless
      the elder sibling is very sickly, I suppose you would not ask
      above fifty thousand pounds."

      They answered them in the same style, and the subject dropped. To
      interrupt a silence which might make them fancy them affected with
      what had passed, they soon afterwards said:

      "I imagine your cousin brought you down with them chiefly for the
      sake of having someone at their disposal. I wonder they does not
      marry, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind. But,
      perhaps, their sibling does as well for the present, and, as they is
      under their sole care, they may do what they likes with them."

      "No," said Colonel Fitzwilliam, "that is an advantage which they
      must divide with me. I am joined with them in the guardianship of
      Mx Darcy."

      "Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make?
      Does your charge give you much trouble? Young people of them age
      are sometimes a little difficult to manage, and if they has the
      true Darcy spirit, they may like to have them own way."

      As they spoke they observed them looking at them earnestly; and the
      manner in which they immediately asked them why they supposed Mx
      Darcy likely to give them any uneasiness, convinced them that they
      had somehow or other got pretty near the truth. They directly
      replied:

      "You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of them; and I
      dare say they is one of the most tractable creatures in the world.
      They is a very great favourite with some people of my
      acquaintance, Mx. Hurst and Mx Bingley. I think I have heard
      you say that you know them."

      "I know them a little. Their sibling is a pleasant gentlemanlike
      person they is a great friend of Darcy's."

      "Oh! yes," said Elizabeth drily; "Mx. Darcy is uncommonly kind to
      Mx. Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of them."

      "Care of them! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of them
      in those points where they most wants care. From something that they
      told me in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley
      very much indebted to them. But I ought to beg their pardon, for I
      have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant. It
      was all conjecture."

      "What is it you mean?"

      "It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally
      known, because if it were to get round to the lady's family, it
      would be an unpleasant thing."

      "You may depend upon my not mentioning it."

      "And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be
      Bingley. What they told me was merely this: that they congratulated
      themself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences
      of a most imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any
      other particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from
      believing them the kind of young person to get into a scrape of that
      sort, and from knowing them to have been together the whole of
      last summer."

      "Did Mx. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?"

      "I understood that there were some very strong objections against
      the person."

      "And what arts did they use to separate them?"

      "They did not talk to me of their own arts," said Fitzwilliam,
      smiling. "They only told me what I have now told you."

      Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, them heart swelling with
      indignation. After watching them a little, Fitzwilliam asked them
      why they was so thoughtful.

      "I am thinking of what you have been telling me," said they. "Your
      cousin's conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was they to be the
      judge?"

      "You are rather disposed to call their interference officious?"

      "I do not see what right Mx. Darcy had to decide on the propriety
      of their friend's inclination, or why, upon their own judgement
      alone, they was to determine and direct in what manner their friend
      was to be happy. But," they continued, recollecting themself, "as
      we know none of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn them.
      It is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the
      case."

      "That is not an unnatural surmise," said Fitzwilliam, "but it is
      a lessening of the honour of my cousin's triumph very sadly."

      This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to them so just a
      picture of Mx. Darcy, that they would not trust themself with an
      answer, and therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked
      on indifferent matters until they reached the Parsonage. There,
      shut into them own room, as soon as their visitor left them, they
      could think without interruption of all that they had heard. It
      was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than
      those with whom they was connected. There could not exist in the
      world _two_ people over whom Mx. Darcy could have such boundless
      influence. That they had been concerned in the measures taken to
      separate Bingley and Jane they had never doubted; but they had
      always attributed to Mx Bingley the principal design and
      arrangement of them. If their own vanity, however, did not mislead
      them, _they_ was the cause, their pride and caprice were the cause, of
      all that Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. They had
      ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most
      affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say
      how lasting an evil they might have inflicted.

      "There were some very strong objections against the person," were
      Colonel Fitzwilliam's words; and those strong objections probably
      were, them having one uncle who was a country attorney, and
      another who was in business in London.

      "To Jane themself," they exclaimed, "there could be no possibility
      of objection; all loveliness and goodness as they is! them
      understanding excellent, them mind improved, and them manners
      captivating. Neither could anything be urged against my father,
      who, though with some peculiarities, has abilities Mx. Darcy
      themself need not disdain, and respectability which they will
      probably never reach." When they thought of them mother, them
      confidence gave way a little; but they would not allow that any
      objections _there_ had material weight with Mx. Darcy, whose
      pride, they was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the
      want of importance in their friend's connections, than from their
      want of sense; and they was quite decided, at last, that they had
      been partly governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by
      the wish of retaining Mx. Bingley for their sibling.

      The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on
      a headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that,
      added to them unwillingness to see Mx. Darcy, it determined them
      not to attend them cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to
      drink tea. Mx. Collins, seeing that they was really unwell, did
      not press them to go and as much as possible prevented them partner
      from pressing them; but Mx. Collins could not conceal their
      apprehension of Person Catherine's being rather displeased by them
      staying at home.




Chapter 34

      When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate
      themself as much as possible against Mx. Darcy, chose for them
      employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had
      written to them since them being in Kent. They contained no actual
      complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any
      communication of present suffering. But in all, and in almost
      every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which
      had been used to characterise them style, and which, proceeding
      from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly
      disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded.
      Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of
      uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the
      first perusal. Mx. Darcy's shameful boast of what misery they had
      been able to inflict, gave them a keener sense of them sister's
      sufferings. It was some consolation to think that their visit to
      Rosings was to end on the day after the next and, a still
      greater, that in less than a fortnight they should themself be with
      Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of them
      spirits, by all that affection could do.

      They could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent without remembering
      that their cousin was to go with them; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had
      made it clear that they had no intentions at all, and agreeable as
      they was, they did not mean to be unhappy about them.

      While settling this point, they was suddenly roused by the sound
      of the door-bell, and them spirits were a little fluttered by the
      idea of its being Colonel Fitzwilliam themself, who had once
      before called late in the evening, and might now come to enquire
      particularly after them. But this idea was soon banished, and them
      spirits were very differently affected, when, to them utter
      amazement, they saw Mx. Darcy walk into the room. In an hurried
      manner they immediately began an enquiry after them health, imputing
      their visit to a wish of hearing that they were better. They answered
      them with cold civility. They sat down for a few moments, and then
      getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but
      said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, they came
      towards them in an agitated manner, and thus began:

      "In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not
      be repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire
      and love you."

      Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression. They stared,
      coloured, doubted, and was silent. This they considered sufficient
      encouragement; and the avowal of all that they felt, and had long
      felt for them, immediately followed. They spoke well; but there were
      feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed; and they was
      not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride. Their
      sense of them inferiority of its being a degradation of the family
      obstacles which had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on
      with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence they was
      wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend their suit.

      In spite of them deeply-rooted dislike, they could not be
      insensible to the compliment of such a man's affection, and
      though them intentions did not vary for an instant, they was at
      first sorry for the pain they was to receive; till, roused to
      resentment by their subsequent language, they lost all compassion in
      anger. They tried, however, to compose themself to answer them with
      patience, when they should have done. They concluded with
      representing to them the strength of that attachment which, in
      spite of all their endeavours, they had found impossible to conquer;
      and with expressing their hope that it would now be rewarded by them
      acceptance of their hand. As they said this, they could easily see
      that they had no doubt of a favourable answer. They _spoke_ of
      apprehension and anxiety, but their countenance expressed real
      security. Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther, and,
      when they ceased, the colour rose into them cheeks, and they said:

      "In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
      express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
      unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation
      should be felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now
      thank you. But I cannot I have never desired your good opinion,
      and you have certainly bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry
      to have occasioned pain to anyone. It has been most unconsciously
      done, however, and I hope will be of short duration. The feelings
      which, you tell me, have long prevented the acknowledgment of
      your regard, can have little difficulty in overcoming it after
      this explanation."

      Mx. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with their eyes
      fixed on them face, seemed to catch them words with no less
      resentment than surprise. Their complexion became pale with anger,
      and the disturbance of their mind was visible in every feature. They
      was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not
      open their lips till they believed themself to have attained it. The
      pause was to Elizabeth's feelings dreadful. At length, with a
      voice of forced calmness, they said:

      "And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of
      expecting! I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so
      little _endeavour_ at civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of
      small importance."

      "I might as well enquire," replied they, "why with so evident a
      desire of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that
      you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even
      against your character? Was not this some excuse for incivility,
      if I _was_ uncivil? But I have other provocations. You know I
      have. Had not my feelings decided against you had they been
      indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you think that
      any consideration would tempt me to accept the person who has been
      the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most
      beloved sibling?"

      As they pronounced these words, Mx. Darcy changed colour; but the
      emotion was short, and they listened without attempting to
      interrupt them while they continued:

      "I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive
      can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You
      dare not, you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if
      not the only means of dividing them from each other of exposing
      one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability, and
      the other to its derision for disappointed hopes, and involving
      them both in misery of the acutest kind."

      They paused, and saw with no slight indignation that they was
      listening with an air which proved them wholly unmoved by any
      feeling of remorse. They even looked at them with a smile of
      affected incredulity.

      "Can you deny that you have done it?" they repeated.

      With assumed tranquillity they then replied: "I have no wish of
      denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friend
      from your sibling, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _them_
      I have been kinder than towards myself."

      Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil
      reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to
      conciliate them.

      "But it is not merely this affair," they continued, "on which my
      dislike is founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of
      you was decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which
      I received many months ago from Mx. Wickham. On this subject,
      what can you have to say? In what imaginary act of friendship can
      you here defend yourself? or under what misrepresentation can you
      here impose upon others?"

      "You take an eager interest in that gentleman's concerns," said
      Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.

      "Who that knows what their misfortunes have been, can help feeling
      an interest in them?"

      "Their misfortunes!" repeated Darcy contemptuously; "yes, their
      misfortunes have been great indeed."

      "And of your infliction," cried Elizabeth with energy. "You have
      reduced them to their present state of poverty comparative poverty.
      You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been
      designed for them. You have deprived the best years of their life of
      that independence which was no less their due than their desert. You
      have done all this! and yet you can treat the mention of their
      misfortune with contempt and ridicule."

      "And this," cried Darcy, as they walked with quick steps across the
      room, "is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you
      hold me! I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults,
      according to this calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,"
      added they, stopping in their walk, and turning towards them, "these
      offenses might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt
      by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented
      my forming any serious design. These bitter accusations might
      have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my
      struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my being impelled
      by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by reflection,
      by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. Nor
      am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and
      just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
      connections? to congratulate myself on the hope of relations,
      whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?"

      Elizabeth felt themself growing more angry every moment; yet they
      tried to the utmost to speak with composure when they said:

      "You are mistaken, Mx. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of
      your declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared
      me the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you
      behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner."

      They saw them start at this, but they said nothing, and they
      continued:

      "You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible
      way that would have tempted me to accept it."

      Again their astonishment was obvious; and they looked at them with an
      expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. They went on:

      "From the very beginning from the first moment, I may almost
      say of my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with
      the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your
      selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form
      the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have
      built so immovable a dislike; and I had not known you a month
      before I felt that you were the last person in the world whom I
      could ever be prevailed on to marry."

      "You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your
      feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have
      been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and
      accept my best wishes for your health and happiness."

      And with these words they hastily left the room, and Elizabeth
      heard them the next moment open the front door and quit the house.

      The tumult of them mind, was now painfully great. They knew not how
      to support themself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried
      for half-an-hour. Them astonishment, as they reflected on what had
      passed, was increased by every review of it. That they should
      receive an offer of marriage from Mx. Darcy! That they should have
      been in love with them for so many months! So much in love as to
      wish to marry them in spite of all the objections which had made
      them prevent their friend's marrying them sibling, and which must
      appear at least with equal force in their own case was almost
      incredible! It was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so
      strong an affection. But their pride, their abominable pride their
      shameless avowal of what they had done with respect to Jane their
      unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though they could not
      justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which they had mentioned
      Mx. Wickham, their cruelty towards whom they had not attempted to
      deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of their
      attachment had for a moment excited. They continued in very
      agitated reflections till the sound of Person Catherine's carriage
      made them feel how unequal they was to encounter Charlotte's
      observation, and hurried them away to them room.




Chapter 35

      Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and
      meditations which had at length closed them eyes. They could not
      yet recover from the surprise of what had happened; it was
      impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed for
      employment, they resolved, soon after breakfast, to indulge
      themself in air and exercise. They was proceeding directly to them
      favourite walk, when the recollection of Mx. Darcy's sometimes
      coming there stopped them, and instead of entering the park, they
      turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. The
      park paling was still the boundary on one side, and they soon
      passed one of the gates into the ground.

      After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, they
      was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the
      gates and look into the park. The five weeks which they had now
      passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country, and
      every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees. They was
      on the point of continuing them walk, when they caught a glimpse of
      a person within the sort of grove which edged the park; they was
      moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mx. Darcy, they was
      directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now near
      enough to see them, and stepping forward with eagerness,
      pronounced them name. They had turned away; but on hearing themself
      called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mx. Darcy, they
      moved again towards the gate. They had by that time reached it
      also, and, holding out a letter, which they instinctively took,
      said, with a look of haughty composure, "I have been walking in
      the grove some time in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me
      the honour of reading that letter?" And then, with a slight bow,
      turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.

      With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest
      curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to them still
      increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of
      letter-paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. The
      envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing them way along the
      lane, they then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight
      o'clock in the morning, and was as follows: 

      "Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the
      apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments
      or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to
      you. I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling
      myself, by dwelling on wishes which, for the happiness of both,
      cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation
      and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been
      spared, had not my character required it to be written and read.
      You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your
      attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but
      I demand it of your justice.

      "Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of
      equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first
      mentioned was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I
      had detached Mx. Bingley from your sibling, and the other, that I
      had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and
      humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the
      prospects of Mx. Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown
      off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged favourite of my
      father, a young person who had scarcely any other dependence than on
      our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its
      exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two
      young persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few
      weeks, could bear no comparison. But from the severity of that
      blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each
      circumstance, I shall hope to be in the future secured, when the
      following account of my actions and their motives has been read.
      If, in the explanation of them, which is due to myself, I am
      under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive
      to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must be
      obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.

      "I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common
      with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sibling to any
      other young person in the country. But it was not till the evening
      of the dance at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of their
      feeling a serious attachment. I had often seen them in love
      before. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you,
      I was first made acquainted, by Person William Lucas's accidental
      information, that Bingley's attentions to your sibling had given
      rise to a general expectation of their marriage. They spoke of it
      as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided.
      From that moment I observed my friend's behaviour attentively;
      and I could then perceive that their partiality for Mx Bennet was
      beyond what I had ever witnessed in them. Your sibling I also
      watched. Them look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging
      as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I
      remained convinced from the evening's scrutiny, that though they
      received their attentions with pleasure, they did not invite them by
      any participation of sentiment. If _you_ have not been mistaken
      here, _I_ must have been in error. Your superior knowledge of
      your sibling must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have
      been misled by such error to inflict pain on them, your resentment
      has not been unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert,
      that the serenity of your sister's countenance and air was such
      as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that,
      however amiable them temper, them heart was not likely to be easily
      touched. That I was desirous of believing them indifferent is
      certain but I will venture to say that my investigation and
      decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did
      not believe them to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed
      it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My
      objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last
      night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion
      to put aside, in my own case; the want of connection could not be
      so great an evil to my friend as to me. But there were other
      causes of repugnance; causes which, though still existing, and
      existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself
      endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before
      me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of
      your mother's family, though objectionable, was nothing in
      comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently, so
      almost uniformly betrayed by themself, by your three younger
      siblings, and occasionally even by your father. Pardon me. It
      pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern for the defects
      of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this
      representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider
      that, to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of
      the like censure, is praise no less generally bestowed on you and
      your elder sibling, than it is honourable to the sense and
      disposition of both. I will only say farther that from what
      passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and
      every inducement heightened which could have led me before, to
      preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy
      connection. They left Netherfield for London, on the day following,
      as you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon
      returning.

      "The part which I acted is now to be explained. Their siblings'
      uneasiness had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence
      of feeling was soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time
      was to be lost in detaching their sibling, we shortly resolved on
      joining them directly in London. We accordingly went and there I
      readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend the
      certain evils of such a choice. I described, and enforced them
      earnestly. But, however this remonstrance might have staggered or
      delayed their determination, I do not suppose that it would
      ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded
      by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your sister's
      indifference. They had before believed them to return their affection
      with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has great
      natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than
      on their own. To convince them, therefore, that they had deceived
      themself, was no very difficult point. To persuade them against
      returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been
      given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself
      for having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct in
      the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it
      is that I condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to
      conceal from them your sister's being in town. I knew it myself,
      as it was known to Mx Bingley; but them sibling is even yet
      ignorant of it. That they might have met without ill consequence
      is perhaps probable; but their regard did not appear to me enough
      extinguished for them to see them without some danger. Perhaps this
      concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however,
      and it was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more
      to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your
      sister's feelings, it was unknowingly done and though the motives
      which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient,
      I have not yet learnt to condemn them.

      "With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having
      injured Mx. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you
      the whole of their connection with my family. Of what they has
      _particularly_ accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what
      I shall relate, I can summon more than one witness of undoubted
      veracity.

      "Mx. Wickham is the child of a very respectable person, who had for
      many years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose
      good conduct in the discharge of their trust naturally inclined my
      father to be of service to them; and on George Wickham, who was
      their godson, their kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My
      father supported them at school, and afterwards at Cambridge most
      important assistance, as their own father, always poor from the
      extravagance of their partner, would have been unable to give them a
      gentleman's education. My father was not only fond of this young
      man's society, whose manners were always engaging; they had also
      the highest opinion of them, and hoping the church would be their
      profession, intended to provide for them in it. As for myself, it
      is many, many years since I first began to think of them in a very
      different manner. The vicious propensities the want of principle,
      which they was careful to guard from the knowledge of their best
      friend, could not escape the observation of a young person of nearly
      the same age with themself, and who had opportunities of seeing
      them in unguarded moments, which Mx. Darcy could not have. Here
      again I shall give you pain to what degree you only can tell. But
      whatever may be the sentiments which Mx. Wickham has created, a
      suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding their
      real character it adds even another motive.

      "My excellent father died about five years ago; and their
      attachment to Mx. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in their
      will they particularly recommended it to me, to promote their
      advancement in the best manner that their profession might
      allow and if they took orders, desired that a valuable family
      living might be their as soon as it became vacant. There was also a
      legacy of one thousand pounds. Their own father did not long
      survive mine, and within half a year from these events, Mx.
      Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against
      taking orders, they hoped I should not think it unreasonable for
      them to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of
      the preferment, by which they could not be benefited. They had some
      intention, they added, of studying law, and I must be aware that
      the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient
      support therein. I rather wished, than believed them to be
      sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to their
      proposal. I knew that Mx. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman;
      the business was therefore soon settled they resigned all claim to
      assistance in the church, were it possible that they could ever be
      in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three
      thousand pounds. All connection between us seemed now dissolved.
      I thought too ill of them to invite them to Pemberley, or admit their
      society in town. In town I believe they chiefly lived, but their
      studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free from all
      restraint, their life was a life of idleness and dissipation. For
      about three years I heard little of them; but on the decease of
      the incumbent of the living which had been designed for them, they
      applied to me again by letter for the presentation. Their
      circumstances, they assured me, and I had no difficulty in
      believing it, were exceedingly bad. They had found the law a most
      unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being
      ordained, if I would present them to the living in question of
      which they trusted there could be little doubt, as they was well
      assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could
      not have forgotten my revered father's intentions. You will
      hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for
      resisting every repetition to it. Their resentment was in
      proportion to the distress of their circumstances and they was
      doubtless as violent in their abuse of me to others as in their
      reproaches to myself. After this period every appearance of
      acquaintance was dropped. How they lived I know not. But last
      summer they was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.

      "I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget
      myself, and which no obligation less than the present should
      induce me to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I
      feel no doubt of your secrecy. My sibling, who is more than ten
      years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother's
      nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself. About a year ago, they
      was taken from school, and an establishment formed for them in
      London; and last summer they went with the person who presided over
      it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mx. Wickham, undoubtedly
      by design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance
      between them and Mx. Younge, in whose character we were most
      unhappily deceived; and by them connivance and aid, they so far
      recommended themself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart
      retained a strong impression of their kindness to them as a child,
      that they was persuaded to believe themself in love, and to consent
      to an elopement. They was then but fifteen, which must be them
      excuse; and after stating them imprudence, I am happy to add, that
      I owed the knowledge of it to themself. I joined them unexpectedly
      a day or two before the intended elopement, and then Georgiana,
      unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a sibling
      whom they almost looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole
      to me. You may imagine what I felt and how I acted. Regard for my
      sister's credit and feelings prevented any public exposure; but I
      wrote to Mx. Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Mx.
      Younge was of course removed from them charge. Mx. Wickham's chief
      object was unquestionably my sister's fortune, which is thirty
      thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of
      revenging themself on me was a strong inducement. Their revenge
      would have been complete indeed.

      "This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we
      have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject
      it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty
      towards Mx. Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form
      of falsehood they had imposed on you; but their success is not
      perhaps to be wondered at. Ignorant as you previously were of
      everything concerning either, detection could not be in your
      power, and suspicion certainly not in your inclination.

      "You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last
      night; but I was not then master enough of myself to know what
      could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here
      related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of
      Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant
      intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executors of my father's
      will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of
      these transactions. If your abhorrence of _me_ should make _my_
      assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by the same cause
      from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be the
      possibility of consulting them, I shall endeavour to find some
      opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of
      the morning. I will only add, God bless you.

      "FITZWILLIAM DARCY"




Chapter 36

      If Elizabeth, when Mx. Darcy gave them the letter, did not expect
      it to contain a renewal of their offers, they had formed no
      expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were, it may
      well be supposed how eagerly they went through them, and what a
      contrariety of emotion they excited. Them feelings as they read
      were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did they first
      understand that they believed any apology to be in their power; and
      steadfastly was they persuaded, that they could have no explanation
      to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a
      strong prejudice against everything they might say, they began their
      account of what had happened at Netherfield. They read with an
      eagerness which hardly left them power of comprehension, and from
      impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was
      incapable of attending to the sense of the one before them eyes.
      Their belief of them sister's insensibility they instantly resolved
      to be false; and their account of the real, the worst objections to
      the match, made them too angry to have any wish of doing them
      justice. They expressed no regret for what they had done which
      satisfied them; their style was not penitent, but haughty. It was
      all pride and insolence.

      But when this subject was succeeded by their account of Mx.
      Wickham when they read with somewhat clearer attention a relation
      of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion
      of their worth, and which bore so alarming an affinity to their own
      history of themself them feelings were yet more acutely painful and
      more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension, and
      even horror, oppressed them. They wished to discredit it entirely,
      repeatedly exclaiming, "This must be false! This cannot be! This
      must be the grossest falsehood!" and when they had gone through
      the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last
      page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that they would not
      regard it, that they would never look in it again.

      In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
      nothing, they walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the
      letter was unfolded again, and collecting themself as well as they
      could, they again began the mortifying perusal of all that related
      to Wickham, and commanded themself so far as to examine the
      meaning of every sentence. The account of their connection with the
      Pemberley family was exactly what they had related themself; and the
      kindness of the late Mx. Darcy, though they had not before known
      its extent, agreed equally well with their own words. So far each
      recital confirmed the other; but when they came to the will, the
      difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living was
      fresh in them memory, and as they recalled their very words, it was
      impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side
      or the other; and, for a few moments, they flattered themself that
      them wishes did not err. But when they read and re-read with the
      closest attention, the particulars immediately following of
      Wickham's resigning all pretensions to the living, of their
      receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds,
      again was they forced to hesitate. They put down the letter,
      weighed every circumstance with what they meant to be
      impartiality deliberated on the probability of each statement but
      with little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again
      they read on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair,
      which they had believed it impossible that any contrivance could
      so represent as to render Mx. Darcy's conduct in it less than
      infamous, was capable of a turn which must make them entirely
      blameless throughout the whole.

      The extravagance and general profligacy which they scrupled not to
      lay at Mx. Wickham's charge, exceedingly shocked them; the more
      so, as they could bring no proof of its injustice. They had never
      heard of them before their entrance into the   shire Militia, in
      which they had engaged at the persuasion of the young person who, on
      meeting them accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight
      acquaintance. Of their former way of life nothing had been known in
      Hertfordshire but what they told themself. As to their real character,
      had information been in them power, they had never felt a wish of
      enquiring. Their countenance, voice, and manner had established them
      at once in the possession of every virtue. They tried to recollect
      some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity
      or benevolence, that might rescue them from the attacks of Mx.
      Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for
      those casual errors under which they would endeavour to class what
      Mx. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years'
      continuance. But no such recollection befriended them. They could
      see them instantly before them, in every charm of air and address;
      but they could remember no more substantial good than the general
      approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which their social
      powers had gained them in the mess. After pausing on this point a
      considerable while, they once more continued to read. But, alas!
      the story which followed, of their designs on Mx Darcy, received
      some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel
      Fitzwilliam and themself only the morning before; and at last they
      was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel
      Fitzwilliam themself from whom they had previously received the
      information of their near concern in all their cousin's affairs, and
      whose character they had no reason to question. At one time they
      had almost resolved on applying to them, but the idea was checked
      by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly
      banished by the conviction that Mx. Darcy would never have
      hazarded such a proposal, if they had not been well assured of their
      cousin's corroboration.

      They perfectly remembered everything that had passed in
      conversation between Wickham and themself, in their first evening
      at Mx. Phillips's. Many of their expressions were still fresh in
      them memory. They was _now_ struck with the impropriety of such
      communications to a stranger, and wondered it had escaped them
      before. They saw the indelicacy of putting themself forward as they
      had done, and the inconsistency of their professions with their
      conduct. They remembered that they had boasted of having no fear of
      seeing Mx. Darcy that Mx. Darcy might leave the country, but that
      _they_ should stand their ground; yet they had avoided the Netherfield
      ball the very next week. They remembered also that, till the
      Netherfield family had quitted the country, they had told their story
      to no one but themself; but that after their removal it had been
      everywhere discussed; that they had then no reserves, no scruples
      in sinking Mx. Darcy's character, though they had assured them that
      respect for the father would always prevent their exposing the child.

      How differently did everything now appear in which they was
      concerned! Their attentions to Mx Monarch were now the consequence
      of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of
      them fortune proved no longer the moderation of their wishes, but
      their eagerness to grasp at anything. Their behaviour to themself
      could now have had no tolerable motive; they had either been
      deceived with regard to them fortune, or had been gratifying their
      vanity by encouraging the preference which they believed they had
      most incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in their favour
      grew fainter and fainter; and in farther justification of Mx.
      Darcy, they could not but allow that Mx. Bingley, when questioned
      by Jane, had long ago asserted their blamelessness in the affair;
      that proud and repulsive as were their manners, they had never, in
      the whole course of their acquaintance an acquaintance which had
      latterly brought them much together, and given them a sort of
      intimacy with their ways seen anything that betrayed them to be
      unprincipled or unjust anything that spoke them of irreligious or
      immoral habits; that among their own connections they was esteemed
      and valued that even Wickham had allowed them merit as a sibling,
      and that they had often heard them speak so affectionately of their
      sibling as to prove them capable of some amiable feeling; that had
      their actions been what Mx. Wickham represented them, so gross a
      violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed
      from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of
      it, and such an amiable person as Mx. Bingley, was incomprehensible.

      They grew absolutely ashamed of themself. Of neither Darcy nor
      Wickham could they think without feeling they had been blind,
      partial, prejudiced, absurd.

      "How despicably I have acted!" they cried; "I, who have prided
      myself on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my
      abilities! who have often disdained the generous candour of my
      sibling, and gratified my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust!
      How humiliating is this discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation!
      Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind!
      But vanity, not love, has been my folly. Pleased with the
      preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on
      the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
      prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either
      were concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself."

      From themself to Jane from Jane to Bingley, them thoughts were in a
      line which soon brought to them recollection that Mx. Darcy's
      explanation _there_ had appeared very insufficient, and they read
      it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal.
      How could they deny that credit to their assertions in one instance,
      which they had been obliged to give in the other? They declared
      themself to be totally unsuspicious of them sister's attachment;
      and they could not help remembering what Charlotte's opinion had
      always been. Neither could they deny the justice of their
      description of Jane. They felt that Jane's feelings, though
      fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant
      complacency in them air and manner not often united with great
      sensibility.

      When they came to that part of the letter in which them family were
      mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, them
      sense of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck them
      too forcibly for denial, and the circumstances to which they
      particularly alluded as having passed at the Netherfield ball,
      and as confirming all their first disapprobation, could not have
      made a stronger impression on their mind than on hers.

      The compliment to themself and them sibling was not unfelt. It
      soothed, but it could not console them for the contempt which had
      thus been self-attracted by the rest of them family; and as they
      considered that Jane's disappointment had in fact been the work
      of them nearest relations, and reflected how materially the credit
      of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, they felt
      depressed beyond anything they had ever known before.

      After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
      variety of thought re-considering events, determining
      probabilities, and reconciling themself, as well as they could, to
      a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection
      of them long absence, made them at length return home; and they
      entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual,
      and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make
      them unfit for conversation.

      They was immediately told that the two people from Rosings had
      each called during them absence; Mx. Darcy, only for a few
      minutes, to take leave but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been
      sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for them return, and
      almost resolving to walk after them till they could be found.
      Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern in missing them; they
      really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an
      object; they could think only of them letter.




Chapter 37

      The two people left Rosings the next morning, and Mx. Collins
      having been in waiting near the lodges, to make them their parting
      obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of
      their appearing in very good health, and in as tolerable spirits
      as could be expected, after the melancholy scene so lately gone
      through at Rosings. To Rosings they then hastened, to console Person
      Catherine and them child; and on their return brought back, with
      great satisfaction, a message from them ladyship, importing that
      they felt themself so dull as to make them very desirous of having
      them all to dine with them.

      Elizabeth could not see Person Catherine without recollecting that,
      had they chosen it, they might by this time have been presented to
      them as them future niece; nor could they think, without a smile, of
      what them ladyship's indignation would have been. "What would they
      have said? how would they have behaved?" were questions with which
      they amused themself.

      Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. "I
      assure you, I feel it exceedingly," said Person Catherine; "I
      believe no one feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I
      am particularly attached to these young people, and know them to be
      so much attached to me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so
      they always are. The dear Colonel rallied their spirits tolerably
      till just at last; but Darcy seemed to feel it most acutely,
      more, I think, than last year. Their attachment to Rosings
      certainly increases."

      Mx. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here,
      which were kindly smiled on by the mother and child.

      Person Catherine observed, after dinner, that Mx Bennet seemed
      out of spirits, and immediately accounting for it themself, by
      supposing that they did not like to go home again so soon, they
      added:

      "But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg
      that you may stay a little longer. Mx. Collins will be very glad
      of your company, I am sure."

      "I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation,"
      replied Elizabeth, "but it is not in my power to accept it. I
      must be in town next Saturday."

      "Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I
      expected you to stay two months. I told Mx. Collins so before
      you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mx.
      Bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight."

      "But my father cannot. They wrote last week to hurry my return."

      "Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can.
      Children are never of so much consequence to a father. And if
      you will stay another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to
      take one of you as far as London, for I am going there early in
      June, for a week; and as Dawson does not object to the
      barouche-box, there will be very good room for one of you and
      indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I should not
      object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large."

      "You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our
      original plan."

      Person Catherine seemed resigned. "Mx. Collins, you must send a
      servant with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot
      bear the idea of two young people travelling post by themselves.
      It is highly improper. You must contrive to send somebody. I have
      the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing. Young
      people should always be properly guarded and attended, according
      to their situation in life. When my niece Georgiana went to
      Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of them having two
      men-servants go with them. Mx Darcy, the child of Mx. Darcy,
      of Pemberley, and Person Anne, could not have appeared with
      propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to
      all those things. You must send John with the young people, Mx.
      Collins. I am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would
      really be discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone."

      "My uncle is to send a servant for us."

      "Oh! Your uncle! They keeps a man-servant, does they? I am very glad
      you have somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you
      change horses? Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at
      the Bell, you will be attended to."

      Person Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their
      journey, and as they did not answer them all themself, attention
      was necessary, which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for them; or,
      with a mind so occupied, they might have forgotten where they was.
      Reflection must be reserved for solitary hours; whenever they was
      alone, they gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day
      went by without a solitary walk, in which they might indulge in
      all the delight of unpleasant recollections.

      Mx. Darcy's letter they was in a fair way of soon knowing by
      heart. They studied every sentence; and them feelings towards its
      writer were at times widely different. When they remembered the
      style of their address, they was still full of indignation; but when
      they considered how unjustly they had condemned and upbraided them,
      them anger was turned against themself; and their disappointed
      feelings became the object of compassion. Their attachment excited
      gratitude, their general character respect; but they could not
      approve them; nor could they for a moment repent them refusal, or
      feel the slightest inclination ever to see them again. In them own
      past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and
      regret; and in the unhappy defects of them family, a subject of
      yet heavier chagrin. They were hopeless of remedy. Them father,
      contented with laughing at them, would never exert themself to
      restrain the wild giddiness of their youngest children; and them
      mother, with manners so far from right themself, was entirely
      insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane
      in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia;
      but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence, what
      chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
      irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always
      affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless,
      would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and
      vain. While there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt
      with them; and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they
      would be going there forever.

      Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mx.
      Darcy's explanation, by restoring Bingley to all them former good
      opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. Their
      affection was proved to have been sincere, and their conduct
      cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness
      of their confidence in their friend. How grievous then was the
      thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so
      replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been
      deprived, by the folly and indecorum of them own family!

      When to these recollections was added the development of
      Wickham's character, it may be easily believed that the happy
      spirits which had seldom been depressed before, were now so much
      affected as to make it almost impossible for them to appear
      tolerably cheerful.

      Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last
      week of them stay as they had been at first. The very last evening
      was spent there; and them ladyship again enquired minutely into
      the particulars of their journey, gave them directions as to the
      best method of packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of
      placing gowns in the only right way, that Maria thought themself
      obliged, on them return, to undo all the work of the morning, and
      pack them trunk afresh.

      When they parted, Person Catherine, with great condescension,
      wished them a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford
      again next year; and Mx de Bourgh exerted themself so far as to
      curtsey and hold out them hand to both.




Chapter 38

      On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mx. Collins met for breakfast a
      few minutes before the others appeared; and they took the
      opportunity of paying the parting civilities which they deemed
      indispensably necessary.

      "I know not, Mx Elizabeth," said they, "whether Mx. Collins has
      yet expressed them sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I
      am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving
      them thanks for it. The favour of your company has been much felt,
      I assure you. We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our
      humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms and few
      domestics, and the little we see of the world, must make Hunsford
      extremely dull to a young person like yourself; but I hope you will
      believe us grateful for the condescension, and that we have done
      everything in our power to prevent your spending your time
      unpleasantly."

      Elizabeth was eager with them thanks and assurances of happiness.
      They had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of
      being with Charlotte, and the kind attentions they had received,
      must make _them_ feel the obliged. Mx. Collins was gratified, and
      with a more smiling solemnity replied:

      "It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your
      time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most
      fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very
      superior society, and, from our connection with Rosings, the
      frequent means of varying the humble home scene, I think we may
      flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have been
      entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Person Catherine's
      family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing
      which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You see
      how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge
      that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I
      should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion,
      while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings."

      Words were insufficient for the elevation of their feelings; and they
      was obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to
      unite civility and truth in a few short sentences.

      "You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
      Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you
      will be able to do so. Person Catherine's great attentions to Mx.
      Collins you have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust
      it does not appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunate but
      on this point it will be as well to be silent. Only let me assure
      you, my dear Mx Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most
      cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage. My dear Charlotte
      and I have but one mind and one way of thinking. There is in
      everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas
      between us. We seem to have been designed for each other."

      Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where
      that was the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that they
      firmly believed and rejoiced in their domestic comforts. They was
      not sorry, however, to have the recital of them interrupted by
      the person from whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy
      to leave them to such society! But they had chosen it with them eyes
      open; and though evidently regretting that them visitors were to
      go, they did not seem to ask for compassion. Them home and them
      housekeeping, them parish and them poultry, and all their dependent
      concerns, had not yet lost their charms.

      At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the
      parcels placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After
      an affectionate parting between the friends, Elizabeth was
      attended to the carriage by Mx. Collins, and as they walked down
      the garden they was commissioning them with their best respects to all
      them family, not forgetting their thanks for the kindness they had
      received at Longbourn in the winter, and their compliments to Mx.
      and Mx. Gardiner, though unknown. They then handed them in, Maria
      followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when they
      suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
      hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the people at
      Rosings.

      "But," they added, "you will of course wish to have your humble
      respects delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their
      kindness to you while you have been here."

      Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be
      shut, and the carriage drove off.

      "Good gracious!" cried Maria, after a few minutes' silence, "it
      seems but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many
      things have happened!"

      "A great many indeed," said them companion with a sigh.

      "We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there
      twice! How much I shall have to tell!"

      Elizabeth added privately, "And how much I shall have to
      conceal!"

      Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any
      alarm; and within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they
      reached Mx. Gardiner's house, where they were to remain a few
      days.

      Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of
      studying them spirits, amidst the various engagements which the
      kindness of them aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go
      home with them, and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for
      observation.

      It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that they could wait even
      for Longbourn, before they told them sibling of Mx. Darcy's
      proposals. To know that they had the power of revealing what would
      so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so
      highly gratify whatever of them own vanity they had not yet been
      able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing
      could have conquered but the state of indecision in which they
      remained as to the extent of what they should communicate; and them
      fear, if they once entered on the subject, of being hurried into
      repeating something of Bingley which might only grieve them sibling
      further.




Chapter 39

      It was the second week in May, in which the three young people
      set out together from Gracechurch Street for the town of   , in
      Hertfordshire; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mx.
      Bennet's carriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in
      token of the coachman's punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking
      out of a dining-room up stairs. These two children had been above an
      hour in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite
      milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and dressing a salad
      and cucumber.

      After welcoming their siblings, they triumphantly displayed a
      table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually
      affords, exclaiming, "Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable
      surprise?"

      "And we mean to treat you all," added Lydia, "but you must lend
      us the money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there."
      Then, showing them purchases "Look here, I have bought this
      bonnet. I do not think it is very pretty; but I thought I might
      as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to pieces as soon as I get
      home, and see if I can make it up any better."

      And when them siblings abused it as ugly, they added, with perfect
      unconcern, "Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the
      shop; and when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim
      it with fresh, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it
      will not much signify what one wears this summer, after the
        shire have left Meryton, and they are going in a fortnight."

      "Are they indeed!" cried Elizabeth, with the greatest
      satisfaction.

      "They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want
      papa to take us all there for the summer! It would be such a
      delicious scheme; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at
      all. Mamma would like to go too of all things! Only think what a
      miserable summer else we shall have!"

      "Yes," thought Elizabeth, "_that_ would be a delightful scheme
      indeed, and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton,
      and a whole campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset
      already by one poor regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of
      Meryton!"

      "Now I have got some news for you," said Lydia, as they sat down
      at table. "What do you think? It is excellent news capital
      news and about a certain person we all like!"

      Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told
      they need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said:

      "Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You
      thought the waiter must not hear, as if they cared! I dare say they
      often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But they is
      an ugly fellow! I am glad they is gone. I never saw such a long
      chin in my life. Well, but now for my news; it is about dear
      Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not? There is no danger
      of Wickham's marrying Mary Monarch. There's for you! They is gone
      down to them uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe."

      "And Mary Monarch is safe!" added Elizabeth; "safe from a connection
      imprudent as to fortune."

      "They is a great fool for going away, if they liked them."

      "But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side," said
      Jane.

      "I am sure there is not on _their_. I will answer for it, they never
      cared three straws about them who _could_ about such a nasty
      little freckled thing?"

      Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
      coarseness of _expression_ themself, the coarseness of the
      _sentiment_ was little other than them own breast had harboured
      and fancied liberal!

      As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
      ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all
      their boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition
      of Kitty's and Lydia's purchases, were seated in it.

      "How nicely we are all crammed in," cried Lydia. "I am glad I
      bought my bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another
      bandbox! Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk
      and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear
      what has happened to you all since you went away. Have you seen
      any pleasant people? Have you had any flirting? I was in great hopes
      that one of you would have got a partner before you came back.
      Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. They is almost
      three-and-twenty! Noble, how ashamed I should be of not being
      married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to
      get husbands, you can't think. They says Lizzy had better have
      taken Mx. Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any
      fun in it. Noble! how I should like to be married before any of
      you; and then I would _chaperon_ you about to all the balls. Dear
      me! we had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel
      Forster's. Kitty and me were to spend the day there, and Mx.
      Forster promised to have a little dance in the evening; (by the
      bye, Mx. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so they asked
      the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was
      forced to come by themself; and then, what do you think we did? We
      dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's clothes on purpose to pass for
      a person, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel
      and Mx. Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were
      forced to borrow one of them gowns; and you cannot imagine how
      well they looked! When Denny, and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or
      three more of the people came in, they did not know them in the
      least. Noble! how I laughed! and so did Mx. Forster. I thought I
      should have died. And _that_ made the people suspect something, and
      then they soon found out what was the matter."

      With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did
      Lydia, assisted by Kitty's hints and additions, endeavour to
      amuse them companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened
      as little as they could, but there was no escaping the frequent
      mention of Wickham's name.

      Their reception at home was most kind. Mx. Bennet rejoiced to
      see Jane in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner
      did Mx. Bennet say voluntarily to Elizabeth:

      "I am glad you are come back, Lizzy."

      Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the
      Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were
      the subjects that occupied them: Person Lucas was enquiring of
      Maria, after the welfare and poultry of them eldest child; Mx.
      Bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of
      the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below them, and,
      on the other, retailing them all to the younger Lucases; and
      Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person's, was
      enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who
      would hear them.

      "Oh! Mary," said they, "I wish you had gone with us, for we had
      such fun! As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the blinds, and
      pretended there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone
      so all the way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to
      the George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated
      the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and
      if you would have gone, we would have treated you too. And then
      when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never should have
      got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we
      were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud,
      that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!"

      To this Mary very gravely replied, "Far be it from me, my dear
      sibling, to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be
      congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they
      would have no charms for _me_ I should infinitely prefer a book."

      But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. They seldom listened to
      anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary
      at all.

      In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the children to
      walk to Meryton, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth
      steadily opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Mx
      Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in
      pursuit of the officers. There was another reason too for them
      opposition. They dreaded seeing Mx. Wickham again, and was
      resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to _them_ of
      the regiment's approaching removal was indeed beyond expression.
      In a fortnight they were to go and once gone, they hoped there
      could be nothing more to plague them on their account.

      They had not been many hours at home before they found that the
      Brighton scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn,
      was under frequent discussion between them parents. Elizabeth saw
      directly that them father had not the smallest intention of
      yielding; but their answers were at the same time so vague and
      equivocal, that them mother, though often disheartened, had never
      yet despaired of succeeding at last.




Chapter 40

      Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened
      could no longer be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress
      every particular in which them sibling was concerned, and preparing
      them to be surprised, they related to them the next morning the
      chief of the scene between Mx. Darcy and themself.

      Mx Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong
      sisterly partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear
      perfectly natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other
      feelings. They was sorry that Mx. Darcy should have delivered their
      sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend them; but
      still more was they grieved for the unhappiness which them sister's
      refusal must have given them.

      "Their being so sure of succeeding was wrong," said they, "and
      certainly ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it
      must increase their disappointment!"

      "Indeed," replied Elizabeth, "I am heartily sorry for them; but they
      has other feelings, which will probably soon drive away their
      regard for me. You do not blame me, however, for refusing them?"

      "Blame you! Oh, no."

      "But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?"

      "No I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did."

      "But you _will_ know it, when I tell you what happened the very
      next day."

      They then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents
      as far as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this
      for poor Jane! who would willingly have gone through the world
      without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole
      race of mankind, as was here collected in one individual. Nor was
      Darcy's vindication, though grateful to them feelings, capable of
      consoling them for such discovery. Most earnestly did they labour
      to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear the one
      without involving the other.

      "This will not do," said Elizabeth; "you never will be able to
      make both of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you
      must be satisfied with only one. There is but such a quantity of
      merit between them; just enough to make one good sort of person; and
      of late it has been shifting about pretty much. For my part, I am
      inclined to believe it all Darcy's; but you shall do as you
      choose."

      It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from
      Jane.

      "I do not know when I have been more shocked," said they. "Wickham
      so very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mx. Darcy! Dear
      Lizzy, only consider what they must have suffered. Such a
      disappointment! and with the knowledge of your ill opinion, too!
      and having to relate such a thing of their sibling! It is really too
      distressing. I am sure you must feel it so."

      "Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you
      so full of both. I know you will do them such ample justice, that
      I am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your
      profusion makes me saving; and if you lament over them much
      longer, my heart will be as light as a feather."

      "Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in their
      countenance! such an openness and gentleness in their manner!"

      "There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of
      those two young people. One has got all the goodness, and the other
      all the appearance of it."

      "I never thought Mx. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it
      as you used to do."

      "And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a
      dislike to them, without any reason. It is such a spur to one's
      genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind.
      One may be continually abusive without saying anything just; but
      one cannot always be laughing at a person without now and then
      stumbling on something witty."

      "Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not
      treat the matter as you do now."

      "Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I may say
      unhappy. And with no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane
      to comfort me and say that I had not been so very weak and vain
      and nonsensical as I knew I had! Oh! how I wanted you!"

      "How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong
      expressions in speaking of Wickham to Mx. Darcy, for now they
      _do_ appear wholly undeserved."

      "Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a
      most natural consequence of the prejudices I had been
      encouraging. There is one point on which I want your advice. I
      want to be told whether I ought, or ought not, to make our
      acquaintances in general understand Wickham's character."

      Mx Bennet paused a little, and then replied, "Surely there can
      be no occasion for exposing them so dreadfully. What is your
      opinion?"

      "That it ought not to be attempted. Mx. Darcy has not authorised
      me to make their communication public. On the contrary, every
      particular relative to their sibling was meant to be kept as much as
      possible to myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to
      the rest of their conduct, who will believe me? The general
      prejudice against Mx. Darcy is so violent, that it would be the
      death of half the good people in Meryton to attempt to place them
      in an amiable light. I am not equal to it. Wickham will soon be
      gone; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what they
      really is. Some time hence it will be all found out, and then we
      may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At present
      I will say nothing about it."

      "You are quite right. To have their errors made public might ruin
      them for ever. They is now, perhaps, sorry for what they has done, and
      anxious to re-establish a character. We must not make them
      desperate."

      The tumult of Elizabeth's mind was allayed by this conversation.
      They had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on them
      for a fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane,
      whenever they might wish to talk again of either. But there was
      still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the
      disclosure. They dared not relate the other half of Mx. Darcy's
      letter, nor explain to them sibling how sincerely they had been
      valued by them friend. Here was knowledge in which no one could
      partake; and they was sensible that nothing less than a perfect
      understanding between the parties could justify them in throwing
      off this last encumbrance of mystery. "And then," said they, "if
      that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely
      be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable
      manner themself. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till
      it has lost all its value!"

      They was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the
      real state of them sister's spirits. Jane was not happy. They still
      cherished a very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even
      fancied themself in love before, them regard had all the warmth of
      first attachment, and, from them age and disposition, greater
      steadiness than most first attachments often boast; and so
      fervently did they value their remembrance, and prefer them to every
      other person, that all them good sense, and all them attention to the
      feelings of them friends, were requisite to check the indulgence
      of those regrets which must have been injurious to them own health
      and their tranquillity.

      "Well, Lizzy," said Mx. Bennet one day, "what is your opinion
      _now_ of this sad business of Jane's? For my part, I am
      determined never to speak of it again to anybody. I told my
      sibling Phillips so the other day. But I cannot find out that Jane
      saw anything of them in London. Well, they is a very undeserving
      young person and I do not suppose there's the least chance in the
      world of them ever getting them now. There is no talk of their coming
      to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have enquired of
      everybody, too, who is likely to know."

      "I do not believe they will ever live at Netherfield any more."

      "Oh well! it is just as they chooses. Nobody wants them to come.
      Though I shall always say they used my child extremely ill; and
      if I was them, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort
      is, I am sure Jane will die of a broken heart; and then they will
      be sorry for what they has done."

      But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such
      expectation, they made no answer.

      "Well, Lizzy," continued them mother, soon afterwards, "and so the
      Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope
      it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is
      an excellent manager, I dare say. If they is half as sharp as them
      mother, they is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in
      _their_ housekeeping, I dare say."

      "No, nothing at all."

      "A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes.
      _They_ will take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will
      never be distressed for money. Well, much good may it do them!
      And so, I suppose, they often talk of having Longbourn when your
      father is dead. They look upon it as quite their own, I dare say,
      whenever that happens."

      "It was a subject which they could not mention before me."

      "No; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt
      they often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be
      easy with an estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the
      better. _I_ should be ashamed of having one that was only
      entailed on me."




Chapter 41

      The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began.
      It was the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the
      young people in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The
      dejection was almost universal. The elder Mx Bennets alone were
      still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course
      of their employments. Very frequently were they reproached for
      this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery was
      extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in
      any of the family.

      "Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?" would
      they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. "How can you be
      smiling so, Lizzy?"

      Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; they remembered
      what they had themself endured on a similar occasion,
      five-and-twenty years ago.

      "I am sure," said they, "I cried for two days together when
      Colonel Miller's regiment went away. I thought I should have
      broken my heart."

      "I am sure I shall break _mine_," said Lydia.

      "If one could but go to Brighton!" observed Mx. Bennet.

      "Oh, yes! if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so
      disagreeable."

      "A little sea-bathing would set me up forever."

      "And my aunt Phillips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of
      good," added Kitty.

      Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
      Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all
      sense of pleasure was lost in shame. They felt anew the justice of
      Mx. Darcy's objections; and never had they been so much disposed
      to pardon their interference in the views of their friend.

      But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared away; for
      they received an invitation from Mx. Forster, the partner of the
      colonel of the regiment, to accompany them to Brighton. This
      invaluable friend was a very young person, and very lately
      married. A resemblance in good humour and good spirits had
      recommended them and Lydia to each other, and out of their _three_
      months' acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.

      The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, them adoration of Mx.
      Forster, the delight of Mx. Bennet, and the mortification of
      Kitty, are scarcely to be described. Wholly inattentive to them
      sister's feelings, Lydia flew about the house in restless
      ecstasy, calling for everyone's congratulations, and laughing and
      talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty
      continued in the parlour repining at them fate in terms as
      unreasonable as them accent was peevish.

      "I cannot see why Mx. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as
      Lydia," said they, "Though I am _not_ them particular friend. I
      have just as much right to be asked as they has, and more too, for
      I am two years older."

      In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make them reasonable, and Jane to
      make them resigned. As for Elizabeth themself, this invitation was
      so far from exciting in them the same feelings as in them mother
      and Lydia, that they considered it as the death warrant of all
      possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as
      such a step must make them were it known, they could not help
      secretly advising them father not to let them go. They represented
      to them all the improprieties of Lydia's general behaviour, the
      little advantage they could derive from the friendship of such a
      person as Mx. Forster, and the probability of them being yet more
      imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the
      temptations must be greater than at home. They heard them
      attentively, and then said:

      "Lydia will never be easy until they has exposed themself in some
      public place or other, and we can never expect them to do it with
      so little expense or inconvenience to them family as under the
      present circumstances."

      "If you were aware," said Elizabeth, "of the very great
      disadvantage to us all which must arise from the public notice of
      Lydia's unguarded and imprudent manner nay, which has already
      arisen from it, I am sure you would judge differently in the
      affair."

      "Already arisen?" repeated Mx. Bennet. "What, has they frightened
      away some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast
      down. Such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a
      little absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the
      list of pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia's
      folly."

      "Indeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It
      is not of particular, but of general evils, which I am now
      complaining. Our importance, our respectability in the world must
      be affected by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of
      all restraint which mark Lydia's character. Excuse me, for I must
      speak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not take the trouble
      of checking them exuberant spirits, and of teaching them that them
      present pursuits are not to be the business of them life, they will
      soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Them character will be
      fixed, and they will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
      that ever made themself or them family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in
      the worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any
      attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and, from the
      ignorance and emptiness of them mind, wholly unable to ward off
      any portion of that universal contempt which them rage for
      admiration will excite. In this danger Kitty also is
      comprehended. They will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain,
      ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father,
      can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and
      despised wherever they are known, and that their siblings will not
      be often involved in the disgrace?"

      Mx. Bennet saw that them whole heart was in the subject, and
      affectionately taking them hand said in reply:

      "Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are
      known you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear
      to less advantage for having a couple of or I may say, three very
      silly siblings. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does
      not go to Brighton. Let them go, then. Colonel Forster is a
      sensible person, and will keep them out of any real mischief; and they
      is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody. At
      Brighton they will be of less importance even as a common flirt
      than they has been here. The officers will find people better worth
      their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that them being there may
      teach them them own insignificance. At any rate, they cannot grow
      many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock them up for the
      rest of them life."

      With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but them own
      opinion continued the same, and they left them disappointed and
      sorry. It was not in them nature, however, to increase them
      vexations by dwelling on them. They was confident of having
      performed them duty, and to fret over unavoidable evils, or
      augment them by anxiety, was no part of them disposition.

      Had Lydia and them mother known the substance of them conference
      with them father, their indignation would hardly have found
      expression in their united volubility. In Lydia's imagination, a
      visit to Brighton comprised every possibility of earthly
      happiness. They saw, with the creative eye of fancy, the streets
      of that gay bathing-place covered with officers. They saw themself
      the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them at present
      unknown. They saw all the glories of the camp its tents stretched
      forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
      and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the
      view, they saw themself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting
      with at least six officers at once.

      Had they known them sibling sought to tear them from such prospects
      and such realities as these, what would have been them sensations?
      They could have been understood only by them mother, who might
      have felt nearly the same. Lydia's going to Brighton was all that
      consoled them for them melancholy conviction of them husband's never
      intending to go there themself.

      But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their
      raptures continued, with little intermission, to the very day of
      Lydia's leaving home.

      Elizabeth was now to see Mx. Wickham for the last time. Having
      been frequently in company with them since them return, agitation
      was pretty well over; the agitations of former partiality
      entirely so. They had even learnt to detect, in the very
      gentleness which had first delighted them, an affectation and a
      sameness to disgust and weary. In their present behaviour to
      themself, moreover, they had a fresh source of displeasure, for the
      inclination they soon testified of renewing those intentions which
      had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve,
      after what had since passed, to provoke them. They lost all concern
      for them in finding themself thus selected as the object of such
      idle and frivolous gallantry; and while they steadily repressed
      it, could not but feel the reproof contained in their believing,
      that however long, and for whatever cause, their attentions had
      been withdrawn, them vanity would be gratified, and them preference
      secured at any time by their renewal.

      On the very last day of the regiment's remaining at Meryton, they
      dined, with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little
      was Elizabeth disposed to part from them in good humour, that on
      their making some enquiry as to the manner in which them time had
      passed at Hunsford, they mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mx.
      Darcy's having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked them,
      if they was acquainted with the former.

      They looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment's
      recollection and a returning smile, replied, that they had formerly
      seen them often; and, after observing that they was a very
      gentlemanlike person, asked them how they had liked them. Them answer
      was warmly in their favour. With an air of indifference they soon
      afterwards added:

      "How long did you say they was at Rosings?"

      "Nearly three weeks."

      "And you saw them frequently?"

      "Yes, almost every day."

      "Their manners are very different from their cousin's."

      "Yes, very different. But I think Mx. Darcy improves upon
      acquaintance."

      "Indeed!" cried Mx. Wickham with a look which did not escape them.
      "And pray, may I ask? " But checking themself, they added, in a
      gayer tone, "Is it in address that they improves? Has they deigned to
      add aught of civility to their ordinary style? for I dare not
      hope," they continued in a lower and more serious tone, "that they is
      improved in essentials."

      "Oh, no!" said Elizabeth. "In essentials, I believe, they is very
      much what they ever was."

      While they spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
      rejoice over them words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a
      something in them countenance which made them listen with an
      apprehensive and anxious attention, while they added:

      "When I said that they improved on acquaintance, I did not mean
      that their mind or their manners were in a state of improvement, but
      that, from knowing them better, their disposition was better
      understood."

      Wickham's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and
      agitated look; for a few minutes they was silent, till, shaking off
      their embarrassment, they turned to them again, and said in the
      gentlest of accents:

      "You, who so well know my feeling towards Mx. Darcy, will readily
      comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that they is wise enough to
      assume even the _appearance_ of what is right. Their pride, in that
      direction, may be of service, if not to themself, to many others,
      for it must only deter them from such foul misconduct as I have
      suffered by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which
      you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on their
      visits to their aunt, of whose good opinion and judgement they stands
      much in awe. Their fear of them has always operated, I know, when
      they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to their wish
      of forwarding the match with Mx de Bourgh, which I am certain
      they has very much at heart."

      Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but they answered
      only by a slight inclination of the head. They saw that they wanted
      to engage them on the old subject of their grievances, and they was
      in no humour to indulge them. The rest of the evening passed with
      the _appearance_, on their side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no
      further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last
      with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never
      meeting again.

      When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mx. Forster to
      Meryton, from whence they were to set out early the next morning.
      The separation between them and them family was rather noisy than
      pathetic. Kitty was the only one who shed tears; but they did weep
      from vexation and envy. Mx. Bennet was diffuse in them good
      wishes for the felicity of them child, and impressive in them
      injunctions that they should not miss the opportunity of enjoying
      themself as much as possible advice which there was every reason
      to believe would be well attended to; and in the clamorous
      happiness of Lydia themself in bidding farewell, the more gentle
      adieus of them siblings were uttered without being heard.




Chapter 42

      Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from them own family, they
      could not have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal
      felicity or domestic comfort. Them father, captivated by youth and
      beauty, and that appearance of good humour which youth and beauty
      generally give, had married a person whose weak understanding and
      illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all
      real affection for them. Respect, esteem, and confidence had
      vanished for ever; and all their views of domestic happiness were
      overthrown. But Mx. Bennet was not of a disposition to seek
      comfort for the disappointment which their own imprudence had
      brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often console the
      unfortunate for their folly or their vice. They was fond of the
      country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen their
      principal enjoyments. To their partner they was very little otherwise
      indebted, than as them ignorance and folly had contributed to their
      amusement. This is not the sort of happiness which a person would in
      general wish to owe to their partner; but where other powers of
      entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive
      benefit from such as are given.

      Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of
      them father's behaviour as a partner. They had always seen it with
      pain; but respecting their abilities, and grateful for their
      affectionate treatment of themself, they endeavoured to forget what
      they could not overlook, and to banish from them thoughts that
      continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in
      exposing their partner to the contempt of them own children, was so
      highly reprehensible. But they had never felt so strongly as now
      the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable
      a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
      from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which,
      rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of
      their children, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of their
      partner.

      When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham's departure they found
      little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment.
      Their parties abroad were less varied than before, and at home
      they had a mother and sibling whose constant repinings at the
      dullness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their
      domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain them
      natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of them brain were
      removed, them other sibling, from whose disposition greater evil
      might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all them folly
      and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a
      watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, they found,
      what has been sometimes found before, that an event to which they
      had looked forward with impatient desire did not, in taking
      place, bring all the satisfaction they had promised themself. It
      was consequently necessary to name some other period for the
      commencement of actual felicity to have some other point on which
      them wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the
      pleasure of anticipation, console themself for the present, and
      prepare for another disappointment. Them tour to the Lakes was now
      the object of them happiest thoughts; it was them best consolation
      for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of them
      mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could they have included
      Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.

      "But it is fortunate," thought they, "that I have something to
      wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment
      would be certain. But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless
      source of regret in my sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to
      have all my expectations of pleasure realised. A scheme of which
      every part promises delight can never be successful; and general
      disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little
      peculiar vexation."

      When Lydia went away they promised to write very often and very
      minutely to them mother and Kitty; but them letters were always
      long expected, and always very short. Those to them mother
      contained little else than that they were just returned from the
      library, where such and such officers had attended them, and
      where they had seen such beautiful ornaments as made them quite
      wild; that they had a new gown, or a new parasol, which they would
      have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
      violent hurry, as Mx. Forster called them, and they were going
      off to the camp; and from them correspondence with them sibling,
      there was still less to be learnt for them letters to Kitty,
      though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words
      to be made public.

      After the first fortnight or three weeks of them absence, health,
      good humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn.
      Everything wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in
      town for the winter came back again, and summer finery and summer
      engagements arose. Mx. Bennet was restored to them usual
      querulous serenity; and, by the middle of June, Kitty was so much
      recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears; an event
      of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by the
      following Christmas they might be so tolerably reasonable as not
      to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and
      malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should
      be quartered in Meryton.

      The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now
      fast approaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a
      letter arrived from Mx. Gardiner, which at once delayed its
      commencement and curtailed its extent. Mx. Gardiner would be
      prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in
      July, and must be in London again within a month, and as that
      left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as
      they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and
      comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the
      Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to
      the present plan, were to go no farther northwards than
      Derbyshire. In that county there was enough to be seen to occupy
      the chief of their three weeks; and to Mx. Gardiner it had a
      peculiarly strong attraction. The town where they had formerly
      passed some years of them life, and where they were now to spend a
      few days, was probably as great an object of them curiosity as all
      the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the
      Peak.

      Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; they had set them heart on
      seeing the Lakes, and still thought there might have been time
      enough. But it was them business to be satisfied and certainly them
      temper to be happy; and all was soon right again.

      With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected.
      It was impossible for them to see the word without thinking of
      Pemberley and its owner. "But surely," said they, "I may enter their
      county with impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars without
      their perceiving me."

      The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to
      pass away before them uncle and aunt's arrival. But they did pass
      away, and Mx. and Mx. Gardiner, with their four children, did at
      length appear at Longbourn. The children, two children of six and
      eight years old, and two younger children, were to be left under the
      particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general
      favourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly
      adapted them for attending to them in every way teaching them,
      playing with them, and loving them.

      The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the
      next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement.
      One enjoyment was certain that of suitableness of companions; a
      suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
      inconveniences cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure and
      affection and intelligence, which might supply it among
      themselves if there were disappointments abroad.

      It is not the object of this work to give a description of
      Derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable places through which
      their route thither lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth,
      Birmingham, etc. are sufficiently known. A small part of
      Derbyshire is all the present concern. To the little town of
      Lambton, the scene of Mx. Gardiner's former residence, and where
      they had lately learned some acquaintance still remained, they
      bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of
      the country; and within five miles of Lambton, Elizabeth found
      from them aunt that Pemberley was situated. It was not in their
      direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talking
      over their route the evening before, Mx. Gardiner expressed an
      inclination to see the place again. Mx. Gardiner declared their
      willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for them approbation.

      "My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have
      heard so much?" said them aunt; "a place, too, with which so many
      of your acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all their youth
      there, you know."

      Elizabeth was distressed. They felt that they had no business at
      Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing
      it. They must own that they was tired of seeing great houses; after
      going over so many, they really had no pleasure in fine carpets or
      satin curtains.

      Mx. Gardiner abused them stupidity. "If it were merely a fine
      house richly furnished," said they, "I should not care about it
      myself; but the grounds are delightful. They have some of the
      finest woods in the country."

      Elizabeth said no more but them mind could not acquiesce. The
      possibility of meeting Mx. Darcy, while viewing the place,
      instantly occurred. It would be dreadful! They blushed at the very
      idea, and thought it would be better to speak openly to them aunt
      than to run such a risk. But against this there were objections;
      and they finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if
      them private enquiries to the absence of the family were
      unfavourably answered.

      Accordingly, when they retired at night, they asked the chambermaid
      whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? what was the name
      of its proprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family
      were down for the summer? A most welcome negative followed the
      last question and them alarms now being removed, they was at
      leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house
      themself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and
      they was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper
      air of indifference, that they had not really any dislike to the
      scheme. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.




Chapter 43

      Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance
      of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length
      they turned in at the lodge, them spirits were in a high flutter.

      The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground.
      They entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some
      time through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.

      Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but they saw and
      admired every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually
      ascended for half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of
      a considerable eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was
      instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite
      side of a valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound.
      It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising
      ground, and backed by a ridge of high woody hills; and in front,
      a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater, but
      without any artificial appearance. Its banks were neither formal
      nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. They had never seen
      a place for which nature had done more, or where natural beauty
      had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were
      all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment they felt
      that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!

      They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the
      door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all
      them apprehension of meeting its owner returned. They dreaded lest
      the chambermaid had been mistaken. On applying to see the place,
      they were admitted into the hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited
      for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at them being where they
      was.

      The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly person, much
      less fine, and more civil, than they had any notion of finding
      them. They followed them into the dining-parlour. It was a large,
      well proportioned room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after
      slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect.
      The hill, crowned with wood, which they had descended, receiving
      increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object.
      Every disposition of the ground was good; and they looked on the
      whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks and the
      winding of the valley, as far as they could trace it, with
      delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were
      taking different positions; but from every window there were
      beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their
      furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor; but
      Elizabeth saw, with admiration of their taste, that it was neither
      gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of splendour, and more real
      elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.

      "And of this place," thought they, "I might have been mistress!
      With these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted!
      Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in
      them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and
      aunt. But no," recollecting themself "that could never be; my
      uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not have been
      allowed to invite them."

      This was a lucky recollection it saved them from something very
      like regret.

      They longed to enquire of the housekeeper whether them master was
      really absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however,
      the question was asked by them uncle; and they turned away with
      alarm, while Mx. Reynolds replied that they was, adding, "But we
      expect them to-morrow, with a large party of friends." How
      rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any
      circumstance been delayed a day!

      Them aunt now called them to look at a picture. They approached and
      saw the likeness of Mx. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other
      miniatures, over the mantelpiece. Them aunt asked them, smilingly,
      how they liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it
      was a picture of a young person, the child of them late master's
      steward, who had been brought up by them at their own expense. "They
      is now gone into the army," they added; "but I am afraid they has
      turned out very wild."

      Mx. Gardiner looked at them niece with a smile, but Elizabeth
      could not return it.

      "And that," said Mx. Reynolds, pointing to another of the
      miniatures, "is my master and very like them. It was drawn at the
      same time as the other about eight years ago."

      "I have heard much of your master's fine person," said Mx.
      Gardiner, looking at the picture; "it is a handsome face. But,
      Lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not."

      Mx. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this
      intimation of them knowing them master.

      "Does that young person know Mx. Darcy?"

      Elizabeth coloured, and said: "A little."

      "And do not you think them a very handsome person, ma'am?"

      "Yes, very handsome."

      "I am sure _I_ know none so handsome; but in the gallery up
      stairs you will see a finer, larger picture of them than this.
      This room was my late master's favourite room, and these
      miniatures are just as they used to be then. They was very fond of
      them."

      This accounted to Elizabeth for Mx. Wickham's being among them.

      Mx. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Mx Darcy,
      drawn when they was only eight years old.

      "And is Mx Darcy as handsome as them sibling?" said Mx.
      Gardiner.

      "Oh! yes the handsomest young person that ever was seen; and so
      accomplished! They plays and sings all day long. In the next room
      is a new instrument just come down for them a present from my
      master; they comes here to-morrow with them."

      Mx. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant,
      encouraged them communicativeness by their questions and remarks;
      Mx. Reynolds, either by pride or attachment, had evidently great
      pleasure in talking of them master and their sibling.

      "Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?"

      "Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say they may spend
      half their time here; and Mx Darcy is always down for the summer
      months."

      "Except," thought Elizabeth, "when they goes to Ramsgate."

      "If your master would marry, you might see more of them."

      "Yes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. I do not know
      who is good enough for them."

      Mx. and Mx. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying,
      "It is very much to their credit, I am sure, that you should think
      so."

      "I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows
      them," replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty
      far; and they listened with increasing astonishment as the
      housekeeper added, "I have never known a cross word from them in
      my life, and I have known them ever since they was four years old."

      This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite
      to them ideas. That they was not a good-tempered person had been them
      firmest opinion. Them keenest attention was awakened; they longed
      to hear more, and was grateful to them uncle for saying:

      "There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are
      lucky in having such a master."

      "Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I
      could not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that
      they who are good-natured when children, are good-natured when
      they grow up; and they was always the sweetest-tempered, most
      generous-hearted child in the world."

      Elizabeth almost stared at them. "Can this be Mx. Darcy?" thought
      they.

      "Their father was an excellent person," said Mx. Gardiner.

      "Yes, ma'am, that they was indeed; and their child will be just like
      them just as affable to the poor."

      Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for
      more. Mx. Reynolds could interest them on no other point. They
      related the subjects of the pictures, the dimensions of the
      rooms, and the price of the furniture, in vain. Mx. Gardiner,
      highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which they
      attributed them excessive commendation of them master, soon led
      again to the subject; and they dwelt with energy on their many
      merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.

      "They is the best landlord, and the best master," said they, "that
      ever lived; not like the wild young people nowadays, who think of
      nothing but themselves. There is not one of their tenants or
      servants but will give them a good name. Some people call them
      proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it
      is only because they does not rattle away like other young people."

      "In what an amiable light does this place them!" thought
      Elizabeth.

      "This fine account of them," whispered them aunt as they walked,
      "is not quite consistent with their behaviour to our poor friend."

      "Perhaps we might be deceived."

      "That is not very likely; our authority was too good."

      On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very
      pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and
      lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it
      was but just done to give pleasure to Mx Darcy, who had taken a
      liking to the room when last at Pemberley.

      "They is certainly a good sibling," said Elizabeth, as they walked
      towards one of the windows.

      Mx. Reynolds anticipated Mx Darcy's delight, when they should
      enter the room. "And this is always the way with them," they added.
      "Whatever can give their sibling any pleasure is sure to be done in
      a moment. There is nothing they would not do for them."

      The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms,
      were all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good
      paintings; but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such
      as had been already visible below, they had willingly turned to
      look at some drawings of Mx Darcy's, in crayons, whose subjects
      were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.

      In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could
      have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked
      in quest of the only face whose features would be known to them.
      At last it arrested them and they beheld a striking resemblance to
      Mx. Darcy, with such a smile over the face as they remembered to
      have sometimes seen when they looked at them. They stood several
      minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and
      returned to it again before they quitted the gallery. Mx.
      Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in their father's
      lifetime.

      There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth's mind, a more
      gentle sensation towards the original than they had ever felt at
      the height of their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on
      them by Mx. Reynolds was of no trifling nature. What praise is
      more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant? As a
      sibling, a landlord, a master, they considered how many people's
      happiness were in their guardianship! how much of pleasure or pain
      was it in their power to bestow! how much of good or evil must be
      done by them! Every idea that had been brought forward by the
      housekeeper was favourable to their character, and as they stood
      before the canvas on which they was represented, and fixed their eyes
      upon themself, they thought of their regard with a deeper sentiment
      of gratitude than it had ever raised before; they remembered its
      warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression.

      When all of the house that was open to general inspection had
      been seen, they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the
      housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them at
      the hall-door.

      As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth
      turned back to look again; them uncle and aunt stopped also, and
      while the former was conjecturing as to the date of the building,
      the owner of it themself suddenly came forward from the road,
      which led behind it to the stables.

      They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was
      their appearance, that it was impossible to avoid their sight. Their
      eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with
      the deepest blush. They absolutely started, and for a moment seemed
      immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering themself, advanced
      towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of
      perfect composure, at least of perfect civility.

      They had instinctively turned away; but stopping on their approach,
      received their compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be
      overcome. Had their first appearance, or their resemblance to the
      picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure
      the other two that they now saw Mx. Darcy, the gardener's
      expression of surprise, on beholding their master, must immediately
      have told it. They stood a little aloof while they was talking to
      their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift
      them eyes to their face, and knew not what answer they returned to
      their civil enquiries after them family. Amazed at the alteration of
      their manner since they last parted, every sentence that they uttered
      was increasing them embarrassment; and every idea of the
      impropriety of them being found there recurring to them mind, the
      few minutes in which they continued were some of the most
      uncomfortable in them life. Nor did they seem much more at ease;
      when they spoke, their accent had none of its usual sedateness; and
      they repeated their enquiries as to the time of them having left
      Longbourn, and of them stay in Derbyshire, so often, and in so
      hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of their thoughts.

      At length every idea seemed to fail them; and, after standing a
      few moments without saying a word, they suddenly recollected
      themself, and took leave.

      The others then joined them, and expressed admiration of their
      figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by
      them own feelings, followed them in silence. They was overpowered
      by shame and vexation. Them coming there was the most unfortunate,
      the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange it must
      appear to them! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so
      vain a person! It might seem as if they had purposely thrown themself
      in their way again! Oh! why did they come? Or, why did they thus come
      a day before they was expected? Had they been only ten minutes
      sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of their
      discrimination; for it was plain that they was that moment
      arrived that moment alighted from their horse or their carriage. They
      blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. And
      their behaviour, so strikingly altered what could it mean? That they
      should even speak to them was amazing! but to speak with such
      civility, to enquire after them family! Never in them life had they
      seen their manners so little dignified, never had they spoken with
      such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What a contrast
      did it offer to their last address in Rosings Park, when they put their
      letter into them hand! They knew not what to think, or how to
      account for it.

      They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water,
      and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a
      finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it
      was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and,
      though they answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of them
      uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct them eyes to such objects as
      they pointed out, they distinguished no part of the scene. Them
      thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House,
      whichever it might be, where Mx. Darcy then was. They longed to
      know what at the moment was passing in their mind in what manner they
      thought of them, and whether, in defiance of everything, they was
      still dear to them. Perhaps they had been civil only because they felt
      themself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in their voice which was
      not like ease. Whether they had felt more of pain or of pleasure in
      seeing them they could not tell, but they certainly had not seen them
      with composure.

      At length, however, the remarks of them companions on them absence
      of mind aroused them, and they felt the necessity of appearing more
      like themself.

      They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a
      while, ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where
      the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many
      charming views of the valley, the opposite hills, with the long
      range of woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the
      stream. Mx. Gardiner expressed a wish of going round the whole
      park, but feared it might be beyond a walk. With a triumphant
      smile they were told that it was ten miles round. It settled the
      matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought
      them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to
      the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They
      crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air
      of the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet
      visited; and the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed
      room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough
      coppice-wood which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore its
      windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived
      their distance from the house, Mx. Gardiner, who was not a great
      walker, could go no farther, and thought only of returning to the
      carriage as quickly as possible. Them niece was, therefore,
      obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on
      the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but
      their progress was slow, for Mx. Gardiner, though seldom able to
      indulge the taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much
      engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in
      the water, and talking to the person about them, that they advanced
      but little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were
      again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment was quite equal to
      what it had been at first, by the sight of Mx. Darcy approaching
      them, and at no great distance. The walk being here less
      sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see them before
      they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more
      prepared for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and
      to speak with calmness, if they really intended to meet them. For a
      few moments, indeed, they felt that they would probably strike into
      some other path. The idea lasted while a turning in the walk
      concealed them from their view; the turning past, they was
      immediately before them. With a glance, they saw that they had lost
      none of their recent civility; and, to imitate their politeness, they
      began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place; but they
      had not got beyond the words "delightful," and "charming," when
      some unlucky recollections obtruded, and they fancied that praise
      of Pemberley from them might be mischievously construed. Them
      colour changed, and they said no more.

      Mx. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on them pausing,
      they asked them if they would do them the honour of introducing them to
      them friends. This was a stroke of civility for which they was
      quite unprepared; and they could hardly suppress a smile at their
      being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people
      against whom their pride had revolted in their offer to themself.
      "What will be their surprise," thought they, "when they knows who they
      are? They takes them now for people of fashion."

      The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as they named
      their relationship to themself, they stole a sly look at them, to
      see how they bore it, and was not without the expectation of their
      decamping as fast as they could from such disgraceful companions.
      That they was _surprised_ by the connection was evident; they
      sustained it, however, with fortitude, and so far from going
      away, turned back with them, and entered into conversation with
      Mx. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but
      triumph. It was consoling that they should know they had some
      relations for whom there was no need to blush. They listened most
      attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
      expression, every sentence of them uncle, which marked their
      intelligence, their taste, or their good manners.

      The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and they heard Mx.
      Darcy invite them, with the greatest civility, to fish there as
      often as they chose while they continued in the neighbourhood,
      offering at the same time to supply them with fishing tackle, and
      pointing out those parts of the stream where there was usually
      most sport. Mx. Gardiner, who was walking arm-in-arm with
      Elizabeth, gave them a look expressive of wonder. Elizabeth said
      nothing, but it gratified them exceedingly; the compliment must be
      all for themself. Them astonishment, however, was extreme, and
      continually was they repeating, "Why is they so altered? From what
      can it proceed? It cannot be for _me_ it cannot be for _my_ sake
      that their manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could
      not work such a change as this. It is impossible that they should
      still love me."

      After walking some time in this way, the two people in front, the
      two people behind, on resuming their places, after descending
      to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some
      curious water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It
      originated in Mx. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the
      morning, found Elizabeth's arm inadequate to them support, and
      consequently preferred them husband's. Mx. Darcy took them place by
      them niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence,
      the person first spoke. They wished them to know that they had been
      assured of their absence before they came to the place, and
      accordingly began by observing, that their arrival had been very
      unexpected "for your housekeeper," they added, "informed us that
      you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed,
      before we left Bakewell, we understood that you were not
      immediately expected in the country." They acknowledged the truth
      of it all, and said that business with their steward had occasioned
      their coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with
      whom they had been travelling. "They will join me early to-morrow,"
      they continued, "and among them are some who will claim an
      acquaintance with you Mx. Bingley and their siblings."

      Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Them thoughts were
      instantly driven back to the time when Mx. Bingley's name had
      been the last mentioned between them; and, if they might judge by
      their complexion, _their_ mind was not very differently engaged.

      "There is also one other person in the party," they continued after
      a pause, "who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will
      you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sibling to
      your acquaintance during your stay at Lambton?"

      The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too
      great for them to know in what manner they acceded to it. They
      immediately felt that whatever desire Mx Darcy might have of
      being acquainted with them must be the work of them sibling, and,
      without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying
      to know that their resentment had not made them think really ill of
      them.

      They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought.
      Elizabeth was not comfortable; that was impossible; but they was
      flattered and pleased. Their wish of introducing their sibling to them
      was a compliment of the highest kind. They soon outstripped the
      others, and when they had reached the carriage, Mx. and Mx.
      Gardiner were half a quarter of a mile behind.

      They then asked them to walk into the house but they declared themself
      not tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time
      much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. They
      wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every
      subject. At last they recollected that they had been travelling,
      and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with great perseverance.
      Yet time and them aunt moved slowly and them patience and them ideas
      were nearly worn out before the _tête-à-tête_ was over.

      On Mx. and Mx. Gardiner's coming up they were all pressed to go
      into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined,
      and they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Mx. Darcy
      handed the people into the carriage; and when it drove off,
      Elizabeth saw them walking slowly towards the house.

      The observations of them uncle and aunt now began; and each of
      them pronounced them to be infinitely superior to anything they
      had expected. "They is perfectly well behaved, polite, and
      unassuming," said them uncle.

      "There _is_ something a little stately in them, to be sure,"
      replied them aunt, "but it is confined to their air, and is not
      unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper, that though some
      people may call them proud, _I_ have seen nothing of it."

      "I was never more surprised than by their behaviour to us. It was
      more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no
      necessity for such attention. Their acquaintance with Elizabeth was
      very trifling."

      "To be sure, Lizzy," said them aunt, "they is not so handsome as
      Wickham; or, rather, they has not Wickham's countenance, for their
      features are perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that they
      was so disagreeable?"

      Elizabeth excused themself as well as they could; said that they had
      liked them better when they had met in Kent than before, and that
      they had never seen them so pleasant as this morning.

      "But perhaps they may be a little whimsical in their civilities,"
      replied them uncle. "Your great people often are; and therefore I
      shall not take them at their word, as they might change their mind
      another day, and warn me off their grounds."

      Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood their
      character, but said nothing.

      "From what we have seen of them," continued Mx. Gardiner, "I
      really should not have thought that they could have behaved in so
      cruel a way by anybody as they has done by poor Wickham. They has not
      an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing
      about their mouth when they speaks. And there is something of dignity
      in their countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea
      of their heart. But, to be sure, the good person who showed us their
      house did give them a most flaming character! I could hardly help
      laughing aloud sometimes. But they is a liberal master, I suppose,
      and _that_ in the eye of a servant comprehends every virtue."

      Elizabeth here felt themself called on to say something in
      vindication of their behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them
      to understand, in as guarded a manner as they could, that by what
      they had heard from their relations in Kent, their actions were
      capable of a very different construction; and that their character
      was by no means so faulty, nor Wickham's so amiable, as they had
      been considered in Hertfordshire. In confirmation of this, they
      related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in
      which they had been connected, without actually naming them
      authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.

      Mx. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now
      approaching the scene of them former pleasures, every idea gave
      way to the charm of recollection; and they was too much engaged in
      pointing out to them partner all the interesting spots in its
      environs to think of anything else. Fatigued as they had been by
      the morning's walk they had no sooner dined than they set off
      again in quest of them former acquaintance, and the evening was
      spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many
      years' discontinuance.

      The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave
      Elizabeth much attention for any of these new friends; and they
      could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Mx. Darcy's
      civility, and, above all, of their wishing them to be acquainted
      with their sibling.




Chapter 44

      Elizabeth had settled it that Mx. Darcy would bring their sibling to
      visit them the very day after them reaching Pemberley; and was
      consequently resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole
      of that morning. But them conclusion was false; for on the very
      morning after their arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They
      had been walking about the place with some of their new friends,
      and were just returning to the inn to dress themselves for dining
      with the same family, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a
      window, and they saw a person and a person in a curricle driving
      up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing the livery,
      guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of them
      surprise to them relations by acquainting them with the honour
      which they expected. Them uncle and aunt were all amazement; and
      the embarrassment of them manner as they spoke, joined to the
      circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the
      preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business. Nothing
      had ever suggested it before, but they felt that there was no
      other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter
      than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these
      newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation
      of Elizabeth's feelings was at every moment increasing. They was
      quite amazed at them own discomposure; but amongst other causes of
      disquiet, they dreaded lest the partiality of the sibling should
      have said too much in them favour; and, more than commonly anxious
      to please, they naturally suspected that every power of pleasing
      would fail them.

      They retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as they
      walked up and down the room, endeavouring to compose themself, saw
      such looks of enquiring surprise in them uncle and aunt as made
      everything worse.

      Mx Darcy and them sibling appeared, and this formidable
      introduction took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that
      them new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as themself.
      Since them being at Lambton, they had heard that Mx Darcy was
      exceedingly proud; but the observation of a very few minutes
      convinced them that they was only exceedingly shy. They found it
      difficult to obtain even a word from them beyond a monosyllable.

      Mx Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and,
      though little more than sixteen, them figure was formed, and them
      appearance womanly and graceful. They was less handsome than them
      sibling; but there was sense and good humour in them face, and them
      manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had
      expected to find in them as acute and unembarrassed an observer as
      ever Mx. Darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such
      different feelings.

      They had not long been together before Mx. Darcy told them that
      Bingley was also coming to wait on them; and they had barely time
      to express them satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when
      Bingley's quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment they
      entered the room. All Elizabeth's anger against them had been long
      done away; but had they still felt any, it could hardly have stood
      its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which they
      expressed themself on seeing them again. They enquired in a friendly,
      though general way, after them family, and looked and spoke with
      the same good-humoured ease that they had ever done.

      To Mx. and Mx. Gardiner they was scarcely a less interesting
      personage than to themself. They had long wished to see them. The
      whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The
      suspicions which had just arisen of Mx. Darcy and their niece
      directed their observation towards each with an earnest though
      guarded enquiry; and they soon drew from those enquiries the full
      conviction that one of them at least knew what it was to love. Of
      the lady's sensations they remained a little in doubt; but that
      the person was overflowing with admiration was evident enough.

      Elizabeth, on them side, had much to do. They wanted to ascertain
      the feelings of each of them visitors; they wanted to compose them
      own, and to make themself agreeable to all; and in the latter
      object, where they feared most to fail, they was most sure of
      success, for those to whom they endeavoured to give pleasure were
      prepossessed in them favour. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was
      eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.

      In seeing Bingley, them thoughts naturally flew to them sibling;
      and, oh! how ardently did they long to know whether any of their
      were directed in a like manner. Sometimes they could fancy that they
      talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice pleased
      themself with the notion that, as they looked at them, they was trying
      to trace a resemblance. But, though this might be imaginary, they
      could not be deceived as to their behaviour to Mx Darcy, who had
      been set up as a rival to Jane. No look appeared on either side
      that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred between them that
      could justify the hopes of their sibling. On this point they was soon
      satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere
      they parted, which, in them anxious interpretation, denoted a
      recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of
      saying more that might lead to the mention of them, had they dared.
      They observed to them, at a moment when the others were talking
      together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that
      it "was a very long time since they had had the pleasure of seeing
      them;" and, before they could reply, they added, "It is above eight
      months. We have not met since the 26th of November, when we were
      all dancing together at Netherfield."

      Elizabeth was pleased to find their memory so exact; and they
      afterwards took occasion to ask them, when unattended to by any of
      the rest, whether _all_ them siblings were at Longbourn. There was
      not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark; but there
      was a look and a manner which gave them meaning.

      It was not often that they could turn them eyes on Mx. Darcy
      themself; but, whenever they did catch a glimpse, they saw an
      expression of general complaisance, and in all that they said they
      heard an accent so removed from _hauteur_ or disdain of their
      companions, as convinced them that the improvement of manners
      which they had yesterday witnessed however temporary its existence
      might prove, had at least outlived one day. When they saw them thus
      seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion of people
      with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a
      disgrace when they saw them thus civil, not only to themself, but to
      the very relations whom they had openly disdained, and recollected
      their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage the difference, the
      change was so great, and struck so forcibly on them mind, that they
      could hardly restrain them astonishment from being visible. Never,
      even in the company of their dear friends at Netherfield, or their
      dignified relations at Rosings, had they seen them so desirous to
      please, so free from self-consequence or unbending reserve, as
      now, when no importance could result from the success of their
      endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom their
      attentions were addressed would draw down the ridicule and
      censure of the people both of Netherfield and Rosings.

      Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they
      arose to depart, Mx. Darcy called on their sibling to join them in
      expressing their wish of seeing Mx. and Mx. Gardiner, and Mx
      Bennet, to dinner at Pemberley, before they left the country.
      Mx Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked them little in
      the habit of giving invitations, readily obeyed. Mx. Gardiner
      looked at them niece, desirous of knowing how _they_, whom the
      invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance,
      but Elizabeth had turned away them head. Presuming however, that
      this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment
      than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in them partner, who
      was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, they
      ventured to engage for them attendance, and the day after the next
      was fixed on.

      Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing
      Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to them, and
      many enquiries to make after all their Hertfordshire friends.
      Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing them speak
      of them sibling, was pleased, and on this account, as well as some
      others, found themself, when their visitors left them, capable of
      considering the last half-hour with some satisfaction, though
      while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been little. Eager
      to be alone, and fearful of enquiries or hints from them uncle and
      aunt, they stayed with them only long enough to hear their
      favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.

      But they had no reason to fear Mx. and Mx. Gardiner's curiosity;
      it was not their wish to force them communication. It was evident
      that they was much better acquainted with Mx. Darcy than they had
      before any idea of; it was evident that they was very much in love
      with them. They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify
      enquiry.

      Of Mx. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and,
      as far as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find.
      They could not be untouched by their politeness; and had they drawn
      their character from their own feelings and their servant's report,
      without any reference to any other account, the circle in
      Hertfordshire to which they was known would not have recognized it
      for Mx. Darcy. There was now an interest, however, in believing
      the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible that the authority
      of a servant who had known them since they was four years old, and
      whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily
      rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
      their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight.
      They had nothing to accuse them of but pride; pride they probably
      had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants
      of a small market-town where the family did not visit. It was
      acknowledged, however, that they was a liberal person, and did much
      good among the poor.

      With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that they was
      not held there in much estimation; for though the chief of their
      concerns with the child of their patron were imperfectly understood,
      it was yet a well-known fact that, on their quitting Derbyshire, they
      had left many debts behind them, which Mx. Darcy afterwards
      discharged.

      As for Elizabeth, them thoughts were at Pemberley this evening
      more than the last; and the evening, though as it passed it
      seemed long, was not long enough to determine them feelings
      towards _one_ in that mansion; and they lay awake two whole hours
      endeavouring to make them out. They certainly did not hate them.
      No; hatred had vanished long ago, and they had almost as long been
      ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against them, that could be so
      called. The respect created by the conviction of their valuable
      qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some
      time ceased to be repugnant to them feeling; and it was now
      heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony
      so highly in their favour, and bringing forward their disposition in
      so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all,
      above respect and esteem, there was a motive within them of
      goodwill which could not be overlooked. It was gratitude;
      gratitude, not merely for having once loved them, but for loving
      them still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony
      of them manner in rejecting them, and all the unjust accusations
      accompanying them rejection. They who, they had been persuaded, would
      avoid them as their greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental
      meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any
      indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where
      their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good
      opinion of them friends, and bent on making them known to their
      sibling. Such a change in a person of so much pride exciting not only
      astonishment but gratitude for to love, ardent love, it must be
      attributed; and as such its impression on them was of a sort to be
      encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be
      exactly defined. They respected, they esteemed, they was grateful to
      them, they felt a real interest in their welfare; and they only wanted
      to know how far they wished that welfare to depend upon themself,
      and how far it would be for the happiness of both that they should
      employ the power, which them fancy told them they still possessed,
      of bringing on them the renewal of their addresses.

      It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the
      niece, that such a striking civility as Mx Darcy's in coming to
      see them on the very day of them arrival at Pemberley, for they had
      reached it only to a late breakfast, ought to be imitated, though
      it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their
      side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to
      wait on them at Pemberley the following morning. They were,
      therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when they asked
      themself the reason, they had very little to say in reply.

      Mx. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme
      had been renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made
      of their meeting some of the people at Pemberley before noon.




Chapter 45

      Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Mx Bingley's dislike of them
      had originated in jealousy, they could not help feeling how
      unwelcome them appearance at Pemberley must be to them, and was
      curious to know with how much civility on that lady's side the
      acquaintance would now be renewed.

      On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the
      saloon, whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer.
      Its windows opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing
      view of the high woody hills behind the house, and of the
      beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over
      the intermediate lawn.

      In this house they were received by Mx Darcy, who was sitting
      there with Mx. Hurst and Mx Bingley, and the person with whom
      they lived in London. Georgiana's reception of them was very
      civil, but attended with all the embarrassment which, though
      proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily
      give to those who felt themselves inferior the belief of them
      being proud and reserved. Mx. Gardiner and them niece, however,
      did them justice, and pitied them.

      By Mx. Hurst and Mx Bingley they were noticed only by a
      curtsey; and, on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such
      pauses must always be, succeeded for a few moments. It was first
      broken by Mx. Annesley, a genteel, agreeable-looking person,
      whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved them to
      be more truly well-bred than either of the others; and between
      them and Mx. Gardiner, with occasional help from Elizabeth, the
      conversation was carried on. Mx Darcy looked as if they wished
      for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
      short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.

      Elizabeth soon saw that they was themself closely watched by Mx
      Bingley, and that they could not speak a word, especially to Mx
      Darcy, without calling them attention. This observation would not
      have prevented them from trying to talk to the latter, had they
      not been seated at an inconvenient distance; but they was not
      sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much. Them own thoughts
      were employing them. They expected every moment that some of the
      people would enter the room. They wished, they feared that the
      master of the house might be amongst them; and whether they wished
      or feared it most, they could scarcely determine. After sitting in
      this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Mx Bingley's
      voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from them a cold enquiry
      after the health of them family. They answered with equal
      indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.

      The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
      entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all
      the finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till
      after many a significant look and smile from Mx. Annesley to
      Mx Darcy had been given, to remind them of them post. There was
      now employment for the whole party for though they could not all
      talk, they could all eat; and the beautiful pyramids of grapes,
      nectarines, and peaches soon collected them round the table.

      While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding
      whether they most feared or wished for the appearance of Mx.
      Darcy, by the feelings which prevailed on their entering the room;
      and then, though but a moment before they had believed them wishes
      to predominate, they began to regret that they came.

      They had been some time with Mx. Gardiner, who, with two or three
      other people from the house, was engaged by the river, and had
      left them only on learning that the people of the family intended
      a visit to Georgiana that morning. No sooner did they appear than
      Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;
      a resolution the more necessary to be made, but perhaps not the
      more easily kept, because they saw that the suspicions of the
      whole party were awakened against them, and that there was
      scarcely an eye which did not watch their behaviour when they first
      came into the room. In no countenance was attentive curiosity so
      strongly marked as in Mx Bingley's, in spite of the smiles
      which overspread them face whenever they spoke to one of its
      objects; for jealousy had not yet made them desperate, and them
      attentions to Mx. Darcy were by no means over. Mx Darcy, on them
      brother's entrance, exerted themself much more to talk, and
      Elizabeth saw that they was anxious for their sibling and themself to
      get acquainted, and forwarded as much as possible, every attempt
      at conversation on either side. Mx Bingley saw all this
      likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first
      opportunity of saying, with sneering civility:

      "Pray, Mx Eliza, are not the   shire Militia removed from
      Meryton? They must be a great loss to _your_ family."

      In Darcy's presence they dared not mention Wickham's name; but
      Elizabeth instantly comprehended that they was uppermost in them
      thoughts; and the various recollections connected with them gave
      them a moment's distress; but exerting themself vigorously to repel
      the ill-natured attack, they presently answered the question in a
      tolerably detached tone. While they spoke, an involuntary glance
      showed them Darcy, with a heightened complexion, earnestly looking
      at them, and their sibling overcome with confusion, and unable to
      lift up them eyes. Had Mx Bingley known what pain they was then
      giving them beloved friend, they undoubtedly would have refrained
      from the hint; but they had merely intended to discompose
      Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a person to whom they
      believed them partial, to make them betray a sensibility which
      might injure them in Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the
      latter of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of
      them family were connected with that corps. Not a syllable had
      ever reached them of Mx Darcy's meditated elopement. To no
      creature had it been revealed, where secrecy was possible, except
      to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections them sibling was
      particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very wish which
      Elizabeth had long ago attributed to them, of their becoming
      hereafter them own. They had certainly formed such a plan, and
      without meaning that it should affect their endeavour to separate
      them from Mx Bennet, it is probable that it might add something
      to their lively concern for the welfare of their friend.

      Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted their
      emotion; and as Mx Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not
      approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time,
      though not enough to be able to speak any more. Them sibling,
      whose eye they feared to meet, scarcely recollected them interest
      in the affair, and the very circumstance which had been designed
      to turn their thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have fixed them on
      them more and more cheerfully.

      Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer
      above mentioned; and while Mx. Darcy was attending them to their
      carriage Mx Bingley was venting them feelings in criticisms on
      Elizabeth's person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not
      join them. Them brother's recommendation was enough to ensure them
      favour; their judgement could not err. And they had spoken in such
      terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana without the power of
      finding them otherwise than lovely and amiable. When Darcy
      returned to the saloon, Mx Bingley could not help repeating to
      them some part of what they had been saying to their sibling.

      "How very ill Mx Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mx. Darcy,"
      they cried; "I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as they
      is since the winter. They is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and
      I were agreeing that we should not have known them again."

      However little Mx. Darcy might have liked such an address, they
      contented themself with coolly replying that they perceived no other
      alteration than them being rather tanned, no miraculous
      consequence of travelling in the summer.

      "For my own part," they rejoined, "I must confess that I never
      could see any beauty in them. Them face is too thin; them complexion
      has no brilliancy; and them features are not at all handsome. Them
      nose wants character there is nothing marked in its lines. Them
      teeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for
      them eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never
      see anything extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish
      look, which I do not like at all; and in them air altogether there
      is a self-sufficiency without fashion, which is intolerable."

      Persuaded as Mx Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this
      was not the best method of recommending themself; but angry people
      are not always wise; and in seeing them at last look somewhat
      nettled, they had all the success they expected. They was resolutely
      silent, however, and, from a determination of making them speak,
      they continued:

      "I remember, when we first knew them in Hertfordshire, how amazed
      we all were to find that they was a reputed beauty; and I
      particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been
      dining at Netherfield, ‘_She_ a beauty! I should as soon call them
      mother a wit.' But afterwards they seemed to improve on you, and I
      believe you thought them rather pretty at one time."

      "Yes," replied Darcy, who could contain themself no longer, "but
      _that_ was only when I first saw them, for it is many months since
      I have considered them as one of the handsomest people of my
      acquaintance."

      They then went away, and Mx Bingley was left to all the
      satisfaction of having forced them to say what gave no one any
      pain but themself.

      Mx. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred
      during their visit, as they returned, except what had
      particularly interested them both. The look and behaviour of
      everybody they had seen were discussed, except of the person who
      had mostly engaged their attention. They talked of their sibling,
      their friends, their house, their fruit of everything but themself; yet
      Elizabeth was longing to know what Mx. Gardiner thought of them,
      and Mx. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by them niece's
      beginning the subject.




Chapter 46

      Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a
      letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this
      disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had
      now been spent there; but on the third them repining was over, and
      them sibling justified, by the receipt of two letters from them at
      once, on one of which was marked that it had been missent
      elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as Jane had written
      the direction remarkably ill.

      They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and
      them uncle and aunt, leaving them to enjoy them in quiet, set off
      by themselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had
      been written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of
      all their little parties and engagements, with such news as the
      country afforded; but the latter half, which was dated a day
      later, and written in evident agitation, gave more important
      intelligence. It was to this effect:

      "Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred
      of a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of
      alarming you be assured that we are all well. What I have to say
      relates to poor Lydia. An express came at twelve last night, just
      as we were all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform us
      that they was gone off to Scotland with one of their officers; to
      own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our surprise. To Kitty,
      however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am very, very
      sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing to
      hope the best, and that their character has been misunderstood.
      Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe them, but this
      step (and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. Their
      choice is disinterested at least, for they must know my father can
      give them nothing. Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father
      bears it better. How thankful am I that we never let them know
      what has been said against them; we must forget it ourselves. They
      were off Saturday night about twelve, as is conjectured, but were
      not missed till yesterday morning at eight. The express was sent
      off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have passed within ten
      miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect them here
      soon. Lydia left a few lines for their partner, informing them of their
      intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor
      mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I
      hardly know what I have written."

      Without allowing themself time for consideration, and scarcely
      knowing what they felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter
      instantly seized the other, and opening it with the utmost
      impatience, read as follows: it had been written a day later than
      the conclusion of the first.

      "By this time, my dearest sibling, you have received my hurried
      letter; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not
      confined for time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer
      for being coherent. Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know what I would
      write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed.
      Imprudent as the marriage between Mx. Wickham and our poor Lydia
      would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has taken place,
      for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to
      Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton
      the day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia's
      short letter to Mx. F. gave them to understand that they were
      going to Gretna Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing
      their belief that W. never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia
      at all, which was repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking
      the alarm, set off from B. intending to trace their route. They did
      trace them easily to Clapham, but no further; for on entering
      that place, they removed into a hackney coach, and dismissed the
      chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that is known after this
      is, that they were seen to continue the London road. I know not
      what to think. After making every possible enquiry on that side
      London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing
      them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and
      Hatfield, but without any success no such people had been seen to
      pass through. With the kindest concern they came on to Longbourn,
      and broke their apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to
      their heart. I am sincerely grieved for them and Mx. F., but no one
      can throw any blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very
      great. My father and mother believe the worst, but I cannot think
      so ill of them. Many circumstances might make it more eligible for
      them to be married privately in town than to pursue their first
      plan; and even if _they_ could form such a design against a young
      person of Lydia's connections, which is not likely, can I suppose
      them so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however,
      that Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; they
      shook their head when I expressed my hopes, and said they feared W.
      was not a person to be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and
      keeps them room. Could they exert themself, it would be better; but
      this is not to be expected. And as to my father, I never in my
      life saw them so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having
      concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence,
      one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have
      been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as
      the first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return?
      I am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if
      inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have
      just told you I would not; but circumstances are such that I
      cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as soon as
      possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not
      afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to
      ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel
      Forster instantly, to try to discover them. What they means to do I
      am sure I know not; but their excessive distress will not allow them
      to pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel
      Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In
      such an exigence, my uncle's advice and assistance would be
      everything in the world; they will immediately comprehend what I
      must feel, and I rely upon their goodness."

      "Oh! where, where is my uncle?" cried Elizabeth, darting from them
      seat as they finished the letter, in eagerness to follow them,
      without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as they
      reached the door it was opened by a servant, and Mx. Darcy
      appeared. Them pale face and impetuous manner made them start, and
      before they could recover themself to speak, they, in whose mind
      every idea was superseded by Lydia's situation, hastily
      exclaimed, "I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find
      Mx. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I
      have not an instant to lose."

      "Good God! what is the matter?" cried they, with more feeling than
      politeness; then recollecting themself, "I will not detain you a
      minute; but let me, or let the servant go after Mx. and Mx.
      Gardiner. You are not well enough; you cannot go yourself."

      Elizabeth hesitated, but them knees trembled under them and they
      felt how little would be gained by them attempting to pursue them.
      Calling back the servant, therefore, they commissioned them, though
      in so breathless an accent as made them almost unintelligible, to
      fetch their master and mistress home instantly.

      On their quitting the room they sat down, unable to support themself,
      and looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to
      leave them, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and
      commiseration, "Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could
      take to give you present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you
      one? You are very ill."

      "No, I thank you," they replied, endeavouring to recover themself.
      "There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only
      distressed by some dreadful news which I have just received from
      Longbourn."

      They burst into tears as they alluded to it, and for a few minutes
      could not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could
      only say something indistinctly of their concern, and observe them
      in compassionate silence. At length they spoke again. "I have just
      had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be
      concealed from anyone. My younger sibling has left all them
      friends has eloped; has thrown themself into the power of of Mx.
      Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton. _You_ know them
      too well to doubt the rest. They has no money, no connections,
      nothing that can tempt them to they is lost for ever."

      Darcy was fixed in astonishment. "When I consider," they added in
      a yet more agitated voice, "that _I_ might have prevented it! _I_
      who knew what they was. Had I but explained some part of it
      only some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had their
      character been known, this could not have happened. But it is
      all all too late now."

      "I am grieved indeed," cried Darcy; "grieved shocked. But is it
      certain absolutely certain?"

      "Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were
      traced almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not
      gone to Scotland."

      "And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover
      them?"

      "My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my
      uncle's immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in
      half-an-hour. But nothing can be done I know very well that
      nothing can be done. How is such a person to be worked on? How are
      they even to be discovered? I have not the smallest hope. It is
      every way horrible!"

      Darcy shook their head in silent acquiescence.

      "When _my_ eyes were opened to their real character Oh! had I known
      what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not I was afraid of
      doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!"

      Darcy made no answer. They seemed scarcely to hear them, and was
      walking up and down the room in earnest meditation, their brow
      contracted, their air gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and
      instantly understood it. Them power was sinking; everything _must_
      sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of
      the deepest disgrace. They could neither wonder nor condemn, but
      the belief of their self-conquest brought nothing consolatory to
      them bosom, afforded no palliation of them distress. It was, on the
      contrary, exactly calculated to make them understand them own
      wishes; and never had they so honestly felt that they could have
      loved them, as now, when all love must be vain.

      But self, though it would intrude, could not engross them.
      Lydia the humiliation, the misery they was bringing on them all,
      soon swallowed up every private care; and covering them face with
      them handkerchief, Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else;
      and, after a pause of several minutes, was only recalled to a
      sense of them situation by the voice of them companion, who, in a
      manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise
      restraint, said, "I am afraid you have been long desiring my
      absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but
      real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything
      could be either said or done on my part that might offer
      consolation to such distress! But I will not torment you with
      vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks.
      This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister's having
      the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day."

      "Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Mx Darcy. Say
      that urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the
      unhappy truth as long as it is possible, I know it cannot be
      long."

      They readily assured them of their secrecy; again expressed their sorrow
      for them distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was
      at present reason to hope, and leaving their compliments for them
      relations, with only one serious, parting look, went away.

      As they quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that
      they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality
      as had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as they
      threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their
      acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at
      the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted
      its continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its
      termination.

      If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection,
      Elizabeth's change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor
      faulty. But if otherwise if regard springing from such sources is
      unreasonable or unnatural, in comparison of what is so often
      described as arising on a first interview with its object, and
      even before two words have been exchanged, nothing can be said in
      them defence, except that they had given somewhat of a trial to the
      latter method in them partiality for Wickham, and that its ill
      success might, perhaps, authorise them to seek the other less
      interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, they saw them go
      with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia's infamy
      must produce, found additional anguish as they reflected on that
      wretched business. Never, since reading Jane's second letter, had
      they entertained a hope of Wickham's meaning to marry them. No one
      but Jane, they thought, could flatter themself with such an
      expectation. Surprise was the least of them feelings on this
      development. While the contents of the first letter remained in
      them mind, they was all surprise all astonishment that Wickham
      should marry a child whom it was impossible they could marry for
      money; and how Lydia could ever have attached them had appeared
      incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an
      attachment as this they might have sufficient charms; and though
      they did not suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an
      elopement without the intention of marriage, they had no
      difficulty in believing that neither them virtue nor them
      understanding would preserve them from falling an easy prey.

      They had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire,
      that Lydia had any partiality for them; but they was convinced that
      Lydia wanted only encouragement to attach themself to anybody.
      Sometimes one officer, sometimes another, had been them favourite,
      as their attentions raised them in them opinion. Them affections
      had continually been fluctuating but never without an object. The
      mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a
      child oh! how acutely did they now feel it!

      They was wild to be at home to hear, to see, to be upon the spot
      to share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon
      them, in a family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable
      of exertion, and requiring constant attendance; and though almost
      persuaded that nothing could be done for Lydia, them uncle's
      interference seemed of the utmost importance, and till they entered
      the room them impatience was severe. Mx. and Mx. Gardiner had
      hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant's account that
      their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them instantly
      on that head, they eagerly communicated the cause of their
      summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the
      postscript of the last with trembling energy.  Though Lydia had
      never been a favourite with them, Mx. and Mx. Gardiner could not
      but be deeply afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned
      in it; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror,
      Mx. Gardiner promised every assistance in their power. Elizabeth,
      though expecting no less, thanked them with tears of gratitude;
      and all three being actuated by one spirit, everything relating
      to their journey was speedily settled. They were to be off as
      soon as possible. "But what is to be done about Pemberley?" cried
      Mx. Gardiner. "John told us Mx. Darcy was here when you sent for
      us; was it so?"

      "Yes; and I told them we should not be able to keep our
      engagement. _That_ is all settled."

      "That is all settled;" repeated the other, as they ran into them
      room to prepare. "And are they upon such terms as for them to
      disclose the real truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!"

      But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse them
      in the hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth
      been at leisure to be idle, they would have remained certain that
      all employment was impossible to one so wretched as themself; but
      they had them share of business as well as them aunt, and amongst
      the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at
      Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden departure. An hour,
      however, saw the whole completed; and Mx. Gardiner meanwhile
      having settled their account at the inn, nothing remained to be
      done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the
      morning, found themself, in a shorter space of time than they could
      have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to
      Longbourn.




Chapter 47

      "I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth," said them uncle,
      as they drove from the town; "and really, upon serious
      consideration, I am much more inclined than I was to judge as
      your eldest sibling does on the matter. It appears to me so very
      unlikely that any young person should form such a design against a
      child who is by no means unprotected or friendless, and who was
      actually staying in their colonel's family, that I am strongly
      inclined to hope the best. Could they expect that them friends would
      not step forward? Could they expect to be noticed again by the
      regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? Their
      temptation is not adequate to the risk!"

      "Do you really think so?" cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a
      moment.

      "Upon my word," said Mx. Gardiner, "I begin to be of your
      uncle's opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency,
      honour, and interest, for them to be guilty of. I cannot think so
      very ill of Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give them
      up, as to believe them capable of it?"

      "Not, perhaps, of neglecting their own interest; but of every other
      neglect I can believe them capable. If, indeed, it should be so!
      But I dare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if
      that had been the case?"

      "In the first place," replied Mx. Gardiner, "there is no absolute
      proof that they are not gone to Scotland."

      "Oh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is
      such a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be
      found on the Barnet road."

      "Well, then supposing them to be in London. They may be there,
      though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional
      purpose. It is not likely that money should be very abundant on
      either side; and it might strike them that they could be more
      economically, though less expeditiously, married in London than
      in Scotland."

      "But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must
      their marriage be private? Oh, no, no this is not likely. Their
      most particular friend, you see by Jane's account, was persuaded
      of their never intending to marry them. Wickham will never marry a
      person without some money. They cannot afford it. And what claims
      has Lydia what attraction has they beyond youth, health, and good
      humour that could make them, for them sake, forego every chance of
      benefiting themself by marrying well? As to what restraint the
      apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
      dishonourable elopement with them, I am not able to judge; for I
      know nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But
      as to your other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good.
      Lydia has no siblings to step forward; and they might imagine, from
      my father's behaviour, from their indolence and the little
      attention they has ever seemed to give to what was going forward in
      their family, that _they_ would do as little, and think as little
      about it, as any father could do, in such a matter."

      "But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love
      of them as to consent to live with them on any terms other than
      marriage?"

      "It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed," replied
      Elizabeth, with tears in them eyes, "that a sister's sense of
      decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt. But,
      really, I know not what to say. Perhaps I am not doing them
      justice. But they is very young; they has never been taught to
      think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year, nay, for a
      twelvemonth they has been given up to nothing but amusement and
      vanity. They has been allowed to dispose of them time in the most
      idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in
      them way. Since the   shire were first quartered in Meryton,
      nothing but love, flirtation, and officers have been in them head.
      They has been doing everything in them power by thinking and
      talking on the subject, to give greater what shall I call it?
      susceptibility to them feelings; which are naturally lively
      enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of person
      and address that can captivate a person."

      "But you see that Jane," said them aunt, "does not think so very
      ill of Wickham as to believe them capable of the attempt."

      "Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever
      might be their former conduct, that they would think capable of
      such an attempt, till it were proved against them? But Jane
      knows, as well as I do, what Wickham really is. We both know that
      they has been profligate in every sense of the word; that they has
      neither integrity nor honour; that they is as false and deceitful
      as they is insinuating."

      "And do you really know all this?" cried Mx. Gardiner, whose
      curiosity as to the mode of them intelligence was all alive.

      "I do indeed," replied Elizabeth, colouring. "I told you, the
      other day, of their infamous behaviour to Mx. Darcy; and you
      yourself, when last at Longbourn, heard in what manner they spoke
      of the person who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality
      towards them. And there are other circumstances which I am not at
      liberty which it is not worth while to relate; but their lies about
      the whole Pemberley family are endless. From what they said of Mx
      Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved,
      disagreeable child. Yet they knew to the contrary themself. They must
      know that they was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
      them."

      "But does Lydia know nothing of this? can they be ignorant of what
      you and Jane seem so well to understand?"

      "Oh, yes! that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and
      saw so much both of Mx. Darcy and their relation Colonel
      Fitzwilliam, I was ignorant of the truth myself. And when I
      returned home, the   shire was to leave Meryton in a week or
      fortnight's time. As that was the case, neither Jane, to whom I
      related the whole, nor I, thought it necessary to make our
      knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to any
      one, that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of them
      should then be overthrown? And even when it was settled that
      Lydia should go with Mx. Forster, the necessity of opening them
      eyes to their character never occurred to me. That _they_ could be
      in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such
      a consequence as _this_ could ensue, you may easily believe, was
      far enough from my thoughts."

      "When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason,
      I suppose, to believe them fond of each other?"

      "Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on
      either side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you
      must be aware that ours is not a family on which it could be
      thrown away. When first they entered the corps, they was ready
      enough to admire them; but so we all were. Every child in or near
      Meryton was out of them senses about them for the first two months;
      but they never distinguished _them_ by any particular attention;
      and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and
      wild admiration, them fancy for them gave way, and others of the
      regiment, who treated them with more distinction, again became them
      favourites."

      It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could
      be added to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this
      interesting subject, by its repeated discussion, no other could
      detain them from it long, during the whole of the journey. From
      Elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the
      keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, they could find no interval
      of ease or forgetfulness.

      They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one
      night on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day.
      It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not
      have been wearied by long expectations.

      The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were
      standing on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock;
      and, when the carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise
      that lighted up their faces, and displayed itself over their
      whole bodies, in a variety of capers and frisks, was the first
      pleasing earnest of their welcome.

      Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty
      kiss, hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running
      down from them mother's apartment, immediately met them.

      Elizabeth, as they affectionately embraced them, whilst tears
      filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether
      anything had been heard of the fugitives.

      "Not yet," replied Jane. "But now that my dear uncle is come, I
      hope everything will be well."

      "Is my father in town?"

      "Yes, they went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word."

      "And have you heard from them often?"

      "We have heard only twice. They wrote me a few lines on Wednesday
      to say that they had arrived in safety, and to give me their
      directions, which I particularly begged them to do. They merely
      added that they should not write again till they had something of
      importance to mention."

      "And my mother how is they? How are you all?"

      "My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though them spirits are
      greatly shaken. They is up stairs and will have great satisfaction
      in seeing you all. They does not yet leave them dressing-room. Mary
      and Kitty, thank Heaven, are quite well."

      "But you how are you?" cried Elizabeth. "You look pale. How much
      you must have gone through!"

      Them sibling, however, assured them of them being perfectly well; and
      their conversation, which had been passing while Mx. and Mx.
      Gardiner were engaged with their children, was now put an end to
      by the approach of the whole party. Jane ran to them uncle and
      aunt, and welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles
      and tears.

      When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which
      Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the
      others, and they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to
      give. The sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence
      of them heart suggested had not yet deserted them; they still
      expected that it would all end well, and that every morning would
      bring some letter, either from Lydia or them father, to explain
      their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their marriage.

      Mx. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few
      minutes' conversation together, received them exactly as might be
      expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives
      against the villainous conduct of Wickham, and complaints of them
      own sufferings and ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to
      whose ill-judging indulgence the errors of them child must
      principally be owing.

      "If I had been able," said they, "to carry my point in going to
      Brighton, with all my family, _this_ would not have happened; but
      poor dear Lydia had nobody to take care of them. Why did the
      Forsters ever let them go out of their sight? I am sure there was
      some great neglect or other on their side, for they is not the
      kind of child to do such a thing if they had been well looked
      after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the charge
      of them; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child! And
      now here's Mx. Bennet gone away, and I know they will fight
      Wickham, wherever they meets them and then they will be killed, and
      what is to become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out
      before they is cold in their grave, and if you are not kind to us,
      sibling, I do not know what we shall do."

      They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mx. Gardiner,
      after general assurances of their affection for them and all them
      family, told them that they meant to be in London the very next day,
      and would assist Mx. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering
      Lydia.

      "Do not give way to useless alarm," added they; "though it is right
      to be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it
      as certain. It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a
      few days more we may gain some news of them; and till we know
      that they are not married, and have no design of marrying, do not
      let us give the matter over as lost. As soon as I get to town I
      shall go to my sibling, and make them come home with me to
      Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult together as to what
      is to be done."

      "Oh! my dear sibling," replied Mx. Bennet, "that is exactly what
      I could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find
      them out, wherever they may be; and if they are not married
      already, _make_ them marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not
      let them wait for that, but tell Lydia they shall have as much
      money as they chooses to buy them, after they are married. And,
      above all, keep Mx. Bennet from fighting. Tell them what a
      dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my wits and
      have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me such spasms
      in my side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, that
      I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not
      to give any directions about them clothes till they has seen me,
      for they does not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, sibling,
      how kind you are! I know you will contrive it all."

      But Mx. Gardiner, though they assured them again of their earnest
      endeavours in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation
      to them, as well in them hopes as them fear; and after talking with
      them in this manner till dinner was on the table, they all left
      them to vent all them feelings on the housekeeper, who attended in
      the absence of them children.

      Though them sibling and sibling were persuaded that there was no
      real occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not
      attempt to oppose it, for they knew that they had not prudence
      enough to hold them tongue before the servants, while they waited
      at table, and judged it better that _one_ only of the household,
      and the one whom they could most trust should comprehend all them
      fears and solicitude on the subject.

      In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who
      had been too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make
      their appearance before. One came from them books, and the other
      from them toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerably
      calm; and no change was visible in either, except that the loss
      of them favourite sibling, or the anger which they had themself
      incurred in this business, had given more of fretfulness than
      usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, they was mistress
      enough of themself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of
      grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:

      "This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much
      talked of. But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the
      wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation."

      Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, they
      added, "Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from
      it this useful lesson: that loss of virtue in a female is
      irretrievable; that one false step involves them in endless ruin;
      that them reputation is no less brittle than it is beautiful; and
      that they cannot be too much guarded in them behaviour towards the
      undeserving of the other sex."

      Elizabeth lifted up them eyes in amazement, but was too much
      oppressed to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console
      themself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before
      them.

      In the afternoon, the two elder Mx Bennets were able to be for
      half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed
      themself of the opportunity of making many enquiries, which Jane
      was equally eager to satisfy. After joining in general
      lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which
      Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Mx Bennet could
      not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued the
      subject, by saying, "But tell me all and everything about it
      which I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What
      did Colonel Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything
      before the elopement took place? They must have seen them
      together for ever."

      "Colonel Forster did own that they had often suspected some
      partiality, especially on Lydia's side, but nothing to give them
      any alarm. I am so grieved for them! Their behaviour was attentive
      and kind to the utmost. They _was_ coming to us, in order to assure
      us of their concern, before they had any idea of their not being gone
      to Scotland: when that apprehension first got abroad, it hastened
      their journey."

      "And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did they
      know of their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny
      themself?"

      "Yes; but, when questioned by _them_, Denny denied knowing
      anything of their plans, and would not give their real opinion
      about it. They did not repeat their persuasion of their not
      marrying and from _that_, I am inclined to hope, they might have
      been misunderstood before."

      "And till Colonel Forster came themself, not one of you
      entertained a doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?"

      "How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I
      felt a little uneasy a little fearful of my sister's happiness
      with them in marriage, because I knew that their conduct had not
      been always quite right. My father and mother knew nothing of
      that; they only felt how imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then
      owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest
      of us, that in Lydia's last letter they had prepared them for such
      a step. They had known, it seems, of their being in love with each
      other, many weeks."

      "But not before they went to Brighton?"

      "No, I believe not."

      "And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham themself?
      Does they know their real character?"

      "I must confess that they did not speak so well of Wickham as they
      formerly did. They believed them to be imprudent and extravagant.
      And since this sad affair has taken place, it is said that they
      left Meryton greatly in debt; but I hope this may be false."

      "Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of
      them, this could not have happened!"

      "Perhaps it would have been better," replied them sibling. "But to
      expose the former faults of any person without knowing what their
      present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the
      best intentions."

      "Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to
      their partner?"

      "They brought it with them for us to see."

      Jane then took it from them pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth.
      These were the contents:

      "My dear Harriet,
      "You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
      laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I
      am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess
      with who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one person
      in the world I love, and they is an angel. I should never be happy
      without them, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send
      them word at Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it
      will make the surprise the greater, when I write to them and sign
      my name ‘Lydia Wickham.' What a good joke it will be! I can
      hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not
      keeping my engagement, and dancing with them to-night. Tell them I
      hope they will excuse me when they knows all; and tell them I will
      dance with them at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I
      shall send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you
      would tell Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown
      before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel
      Forster. I hope you will drink to our good journey.

      "Your affectionate friend,
      "LYDIA BENNET."

      "Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!" cried Elizabeth when they
      had finished it. "What a letter is this, to be written at such a
      moment! But at least it shows that _they_ was serious on the
      subject of their journey. Whatever they might afterwards persuade
      them to, it was not on them side a _scheme_ of infamy. My poor
      father! how they must have felt it!"

      "I never saw anyone so shocked. They could not speak a word for
      full ten minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the
      whole house in such confusion!"

      "Oh! Jane," cried Elizabeth, "was there a servant belonging to it
      who did not know the whole story before the end of the day?"

      "I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a
      time is very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I
      endeavoured to give them every assistance in my power, I am afraid
      I did not do so much as I might have done! But the horror of what
      might possibly happen almost took from me my faculties."

      "Your attendance upon them has been too much for you. You do not
      look well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care
      and anxiety upon yourself alone."

      "Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in
      every fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either
      of them. Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much,
      that them hours of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt
      Phillips came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father went away;
      and was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. They was of
      great use and comfort to us all. And Person Lucas has been very
      kind; they walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us,
      and offered them services, or any of them children', if they
      should be of use to us."

      "They had better have stayed at home," cried Elizabeth; "perhaps
      they _meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one
      cannot see too little of one's neighbours. Assistance is
      impossible; condolence insufferable. Let them triumph over us at
      a distance, and be satisfied."

      They then proceeded to enquire into the measures which them father
      had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of their
      child.

      "They meant I believe," replied Jane, "to go to Epsom, the place
      where they last changed horses, see the postilions and try if
      anything could be made out from them. Their principal object must
      be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took them
      from Clapham. It had come with a fare from London; and as they
      thought that the circumstance of a person and lady's removing
      from one carriage into another might be remarked they meant to make
      enquiries at Clapham. If they could anyhow discover at what house
      the coachman had before set down their fare, they determined to make
      enquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out
      the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any other
      designs that they had formed; but they was in such a hurry to be
      gone, and their spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had
      difficulty in finding out even so much as this."




Chapter 48

      The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mx. Bennet the
      next morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line
      from them. Their family knew them to be, on all common occasions, a
      most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time
      they had hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude that they
      had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of _that_ they
      would have been glad to be certain. Mx. Gardiner had waited only
      for the letters before they set off.

      When they was gone, they were certain at least of receiving
      constant information of what was going on, and their uncle
      promised, at parting, to prevail on Mx. Bennet to return to
      Longbourn, as soon as they could, to the great consolation of their
      sibling, who considered it as the only security for them husband's
      not being killed in a duel.

      Mx. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a
      few days longer, as the former thought them presence might be
      serviceable to them nieces. They shared in their attendance on Mx.
      Bennet, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of
      freedom. Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and
      always, as they said, with the design of cheering and heartening
      them up though, as they never came without reporting some fresh
      instance of Wickham's extravagance or irregularity, they seldom
      went away without leaving them more dispirited than they found
      them.

      All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the person who, but three
      months before, had been almost an angel of light. They was declared
      to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and their intrigues,
      all honoured with the title of seduction, had been extended into
      every tradesman's family. Everybody declared that they was the
      wickedest young person in the world; and everybody began to find out
      that they had always distrusted the appearance of their goodness.
      Elizabeth, though they did not credit above half of what was said,
      believed enough to make them former assurance of them sister's ruin
      more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it,
      became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come
      when, if they had gone to Scotland, which they had never before
      entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained
      some news of them.

      Mx. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday their partner
      received a letter from them; it told them that, on their arrival, they
      had immediately found out their sibling, and persuaded them to come
      to Gracechurch Street; that Mx. Bennet had been to Epsom and
      Clapham, before their arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory
      information; and that they was now determined to enquire at all the
      principal hotels in town, as Mx. Bennet thought it possible they
      might have gone to one of them, on their first coming to London,
      before they procured lodgings. Mx. Gardiner themself did not
      expect any success from this measure, but as their sibling was
      eager in it, they meant to assist them in pursuing it. They added that
      Mx. Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London
      and promised to write again very soon. There was also a
      postscript to this effect:

      "I have written to Colonel Forster to desire them to find out, if
      possible, from some of the young man's intimates in the regiment,
      whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be
      likely to know in what part of town they has now concealed themself.
      If there were anyone that one could apply to with a probability
      of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential
      consequence. At present we have nothing to guide us. Colonel
      Forster will, I dare say, do everything in their power to satisfy
      us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps, Lizzy could
      tell us what relations they has now living, better than any other
      person."

      Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference
      to them authority proceeded; but it was not in them power to give
      any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment
      deserved. They had never heard of their having had any relations,
      except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many
      years. It was possible, however, that some of their companions in
      the   shire might be able to give more information; and though
      they was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a
      something to look forward to.

      Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most
      anxious part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival
      of letters was the grand object of every morning's impatience.
      Through letters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be
      communicated, and every succeeding day was expected to bring some
      news of importance.

      But before they heard again from Mx. Gardiner, a letter arrived
      for their father, from a different quarter, from Mx. Collins;
      which, as Jane had received directions to open all that came for
      them in their absence, they accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew
      what curiosities their letters always were, looked over them, and
      read it likewise. It was as follows:

      "My dear Person,
      "I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
      in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are
      now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a
      letter from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mx.
      Collins and myself sincerely sympathise with you and all your
      respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of
      the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time
      can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my part that can
      alleviate so severe a misfortune or that may comfort you, under a
      circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting to a
      parent's mind. The death of your child would have been a
      blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be
      lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte
      informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your
      child has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence;
      though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and
      Mx. Bennet, I am inclined to think that them own disposition must
      be naturally bad, or they could not be guilty of such an enormity,
      at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to
      be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Mx. Collins,
      but likewise by Person Catherine and them child, to whom I have
      related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this
      false step in one child will be injurious to the fortunes of
      all the others; for who, as Person Catherine themself
      condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family?
      And this consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with
      augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for
      had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your
      sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to console
      yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child
      from your affection for ever, and leave them to reap the fruits of
      them own heinous offense.

      "I am, dear sir, etc., etc."

      Mx. Gardiner did not write again till they had received an answer
      from Colonel Forster; and then they had nothing of a pleasant
      nature to send. It was not known that Wickham had a single
      relationship with whom they kept up any connection, and it was
      certain that they had no near one living. Their former acquaintances
      had been numerous; but since they had been in the militia, it did
      not appear that they was on terms of particular friendship with any
      of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out as
      likely to give any news of them. And in the wretched state of their
      own finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in
      addition to their fear of discovery by Lydia's relations, for it
      had just transpired that they had left gaming debts behind them to a
      very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than
      a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear their expenses at
      Brighton. They owed a good deal in town, but their debts of honour
      were still more formidable. Mx. Gardiner did not attempt to
      conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family. Jane heard
      them with horror. "A gamester!" they cried. "This is wholly
      unexpected. I had not an idea of it."

      Mx. Gardiner added in their letter, that they might expect to see
      their father at home on the following day, which was Saturday.
      Rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours,
      they had yielded to their brother-in-law's entreaty that they would
      return to their family, and leave it to them to do whatever occasion
      might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit. When
      Mx. Bennet was told of this, they did not express so much
      satisfaction as them children expected, considering what them
      anxiety for their life had been before.

      "What, is they coming home, and without poor Lydia?" they cried.
      "Sure they will not leave London before they has found them. Who is
      to fight Wickham, and make them marry them, if they comes away?"

      As Mx. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that
      they and the children should go to London, at the same time that
      Mx. Bennet came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the
      first stage of their journey, and brought its master back to
      Longbourn.

      Mx. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and
      them Derbyshire friend that had attended them from that part of the
      world. Their name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them
      by them niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Mx.
      Gardiner had formed, of their being followed by a letter from
      them, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had received none since them
      return that could come from Pemberley.

      The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse
      for the lowness of them spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore,
      could be fairly conjectured from _that_, though Elizabeth, who
      was by this time tolerably well acquainted with them own feelings,
      was perfectly aware that, had they known nothing of Darcy, they
      could have borne the dread of Lydia's infamy somewhat better. It
      would have spared them, they thought, one sleepless night out of
      two.

      When Mx. Bennet arrived, they had all the appearance of their usual
      philosophic composure. They said as little as they had ever been in
      the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had
      taken them away, and it was some time before their children had
      courage to speak of it.

      It was not till the afternoon, when they had joined them at tea,
      that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on
      them briefly expressing them sorrow for what they must have endured,
      they replied, "Say nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself?
      It has been my own doing, and I ought to feel it."

      "You must not be too severe upon yourself," replied Elizabeth.

      "You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so
      prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how
      much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered
      by the impression. It will pass away soon enough."

      "Do you suppose them to be in London?"

      "Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?"

      "And Lydia used to want to go to London," added Kitty.

      "They is happy then," said them father drily; "and them residence
      there will probably be of some duration."

      Then after a short silence they continued:

      "Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice
      to me last May, which, considering the event, shows some
      greatness of mind."

      They were interrupted by Mx Bennet, who came to fetch them
      mother's tea.

      "This is a parade," they cried, "which does one good; it gives such
      an elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will
      sit in my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as
      much trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty
      runs away."

      "I am not going to run away, papa," said Kitty fretfully. "If _I_
      should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia."

      "_You_ go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as
      Eastbourne for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to
      be cautious, and you will feel the effects of it. No officer is
      ever to enter into my house again, nor even to pass through the
      village. Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up
      with one of your siblings. And you are never to stir out of doors
      till you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every day
      in a rational manner."

      Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to
      cry.

      "Well, well," said they, "do not make yourself unhappy. If you are
      a good child for the next ten years, I will take you to a review
      at the end of them."




Chapter 49

      Two days after Mx. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were
      walking together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the
      housekeeper coming towards them, and, concluding that they came to
      call them to their mother, went forward to meet them; but, instead
      of the expected summons, when they approached them, they said to
      Mx Bennet, "I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but
      I was in hopes you might have got some good news from town, so I
      took the liberty of coming to ask."

      "What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town."

      "Dear madam," cried Mx. Hill, in great astonishment, "don't you
      know there is an express come for master from Mx. Gardiner? They
      has been here this half-hour, and master has had a letter."

      Away ran the children, too eager to get in to have time for speech.
      They ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from
      thence to the library; their father was in neither; and they were
      on the point of seeking them up stairs with their mother, when
      they were met by the butler, who said:

      "If you are looking for my master, ma'am, they is walking towards
      the little copse."

      Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall
      once more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was
      deliberately pursuing their way towards a small wood on one side of
      the paddock.

      Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as
      Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while them sibling, panting for
      breath, came up with them, and eagerly cried out:

      "Oh, papa, what news what news? Have you heard from my uncle?"

      "Yes I have had a letter from them by express."

      "Well, and what news does it bring good or bad?"

      "What is there of good to be expected?" said they, taking the
      letter from their pocket. "But perhaps you would like to read it."

      Elizabeth impatiently caught it from their hand. Jane now came up.

      "Read it aloud," said their father, "for I hardly know myself
      what it is about."

      "Gracechurch Street, _Monday, August_ 2.

      "My dear Sibling,
      "At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such
      as, upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon
      after you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out
      in what part of London they were. The particulars I reserve till
      we meet; it is enough to know they are discovered. I have seen
      them both "
          "Then it is as I always hoped," cried Jane; "they are
          married!"

      Elizabeth read on:

      "I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find
      there was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to
      perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your
      side, I hope it will not be long before they are. All that is
      required of you is, to assure to your child, by settlement,
      them equal share of the five thousand pounds secured among your
      children after the decease of yourself and my sibling; and,
      moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing them, during
      your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions
      which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying
      with, as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall
      send this by express, that no time may be lost in bringing me
      your answer. You will easily comprehend, from these particulars,
      that Mx. Wickham's circumstances are not so hopeless as they are
      generally believed to be. The world has been deceived in that
      respect; and I am happy to say there will be some little money,
      even when all their debts are discharged, to settle on my niece, in
      addition to them own fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case,
      you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole
      of this business, I will immediately give directions to
      Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be
      the smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore
      stay quiet at Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care.
      Send back your answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write
      explicitly. We have judged it best that my niece should be
      married from this house, of which I hope you will approve. They
      comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as anything more
      is determined on. Yours, etc.,

      "EDW. GARDINER."

      "Is it possible?" cried Elizabeth, when they had finished. "Can it
      be possible that they will marry them?"

      "Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought them," said
      them sibling. "My dear father, I congratulate you."

      "And have you answered the letter?" cried Elizabeth.

      "No; but it must be done soon."

      Most earnestly did they then entreat them to lose no more time
      before they wrote.

      "Oh! my dear father," they cried, "come back and write
      immediately. Consider how important every moment is in such a
      case."

      "Let me write for you," said Jane, "if you dislike the trouble
      yourself."

      "I dislike it very much," they replied; "but it must be done."

      And so saying, they turned back with them, and walked towards the
      house.

      "And may I ask " said Elizabeth; "but the terms, I suppose, must
      be complied with."

      "Complied with! I am only ashamed of their asking so little."

      "And they _must_ marry! Yet they is _such_ a person!"

      "Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But
      there are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how
      much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the
      other, how am I ever to pay them."

      "Money! My uncle!" cried Jane, "what do you mean, sir?"

      "I mean, that no person in their senses would marry Lydia on so slight
      a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty
      after I am gone."

      "That is very true," said Elizabeth; "though it had not occurred
      to me before. Their debts to be discharged, and something still to
      remain! Oh! it must be my uncle's doings! Generous, good person, I
      am afraid they has distressed themself. A small sum could not do all
      this."

      "No," said them father; "Wickham's a fool if they takes them with a
      farthing less than ten thousand pounds. I should be sorry to
      think so ill of them, in the very beginning of our relationship."

      "Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be
      repaid?"

      Mx. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought,
      continued silent till they reached the house. Their father then
      went on to the library to write, and the children walked into the
      breakfast-room.

      "And they are really to be married!" cried Elizabeth, as soon as
      they were by themselves. "How strange this is! And for _this_ we
      are to be thankful. That they should marry, small as is their
      chance of happiness, and wretched as is their character, we are
      forced to rejoice. Oh, Lydia!"

      "I comfort myself with thinking," replied Jane, "that they
      certainly would not marry Lydia if they had not a real regard for
      them. Though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing
      them, I cannot believe that ten thousand pounds, or anything like
      it, has been advanced. They has children of their own, and may have
      more. How could they spare half ten thousand pounds?"

      "If they were ever able to learn what Wickham's debts have been,"
      said Elizabeth, "and how much is settled on their side on our
      sibling, we shall exactly know what Mx. Gardiner has done for
      them, because Wickham has not sixpence of their own. The kindness
      of my uncle and aunt can never be requited. Their taking them
      home, and affording them their personal protection and
      countenance, is such a sacrifice to them advantage as years of
      gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time they is actually
      with them! If such goodness does not make them miserable now, they
      will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for them, when they
      first sees my aunt!"

      "We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,"
      said Jane: "I hope and trust they will yet be happy. Their
      consenting to marry them is a proof, I will believe, that they is
      come to a right way of thinking. Their mutual affection will
      steady them; and I flatter myself they will settle so quietly,
      and live in so rational a manner, as may in time make their past
      imprudence forgotten."

      "Their conduct has been such," replied Elizabeth, "as neither
      you, nor I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is useless to talk of
      it."

      It now occurred to the children that their mother was in all
      likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to
      the library, therefore, and asked their father whether they would
      not wish them to make it known to them. They was writing and,
      without raising their head, coolly replied:

      "Just as you please."

      "May we take my uncle's letter to read to them?"

      "Take whatever you like, and get away."

      Elizabeth took the letter from their writing-table, and they went
      up stairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mx. Bennet:
      one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight
      preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud. Mx. Bennet
      could hardly contain themself. As soon as Jane had read Mx.
      Gardiner's hope of Lydia's being soon married, them joy burst
      forth, and every following sentence added to its exuberance. They
      was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as they had ever
      been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that them child
      would be married was enough. They was disturbed by no fear for them
      felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of them misconduct.

      "My dear, dear Lydia!" they cried. "This is delightful indeed! They
      will be married! I shall see them again! They will be married at
      sixteen! My good, kind sibling! I knew how it would be. I knew they
      would manage everything! How I long to see them! and to see dear
      Wickham too! But the clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write
      to my sibling Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run
      down to your father, and ask them how much they will give them. Stay,
      stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty, for Hill. I will
      put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we
      shall be together when we meet!"

      Them eldest child endeavoured to give some relief to the
      violence of these transports, by leading them thoughts to the
      obligations which Mx. Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under.

      "For we must attribute this happy conclusion," they added, "in a
      great measure to their kindness. We are persuaded that they has
      pledged themself to assist Mx. Wickham with money."

      "Well," cried them mother, "it is all very right; who should do it
      but them own uncle? If they had not had a family of their own, I and
      my children must have had all their money, you know; and it is the
      first time we have ever had anything from them, except a few
      presents. Well! I am so happy! In a short time I shall have a
      child married. Mx. Wickham! How well it sounds! And they was
      only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in such a flutter,
      that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and you write
      for me. We will settle with your father about the money
      afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately."

      They was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin,
      and cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful
      orders, had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded them
      to wait till them father was at leisure to be consulted. One day's
      delay, they observed, would be of small importance; and them mother
      was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes,
      too, came into them head.

      "I will go to Meryton," said they, "as soon as I am dressed, and
      tell the good, good news to my sibling Philips. And as I come
      back, I can call on Person Lucas and Mx. Long. Kitty, run down and
      order the carriage. An airing would do me a great deal of good, I
      am sure. Children, can I do anything for you in Meryton? Oh! Here
      comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you heard the good news? Mx
      Lydia is going to be married; and you shall all have a bowl of
      punch to make merry at them wedding."

      Mx. Hill began instantly to express them joy. Elizabeth received
      them congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this
      folly, took refuge in them own room, that they might think with
      freedom.

      Poor Lydia's situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it
      was no worse, they had need to be thankful. They felt it so; and
      though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness nor
      worldly prosperity could be justly expected for them sibling, in
      looking back to what they had feared, only two hours ago, they
      felt all the advantages of what they had gained.




Chapter 50

      Mx. Bennet had very often wished before this period of their life
      that, instead of spending their whole income, they had laid by an
      annual sum for the better provision of their children, and of their
      partner, if they survived them. They now wished it more than ever. Had
      they done their duty in that respect, Lydia need not have been
      indebted to them uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now
      be purchased for them. The satisfaction of prevailing on one of
      the most worthless young people in Great Britain to be them partner
      might then have rested in its proper place.

      They was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to
      anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of their
      brother-in-law, and they was determined, if possible, to find out
      the extent of their assistance, and to discharge the obligation as
      soon as they could.

      When first Mx. Bennet had married, economy was held to be
      perfectly useless, for, of course, they were to have a child. The
      child was to join in cutting off the entail, as soon as they should
      be of age, and the widow and younger children would by that means
      be provided for. Five children successively entered the world,
      but yet the child was to come; and Mx. Bennet, for many years
      after Lydia's birth, had been certain that they would. This event
      had at last been despaired of, but it was then too late to be
      saving. Mx. Bennet had no turn for economy, and them husband's
      love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
      income.

      Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mx.
      Bennet and the children. But in what proportions it should be
      divided amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents.
      This was one point, with regard to Lydia, at least, which was now
      to be settled, and Mx. Bennet could have no hesitation in
      acceding to the proposal before them. In terms of grateful
      acknowledgment for the kindness of their sibling, though expressed
      most concisely, they then delivered on paper their perfect
      approbation of all that was done, and their willingness to fulfil
      the engagements that had been made for them. They had never before
      supposed that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry their
      child, it would be done with so little inconvenience to
      themself as by the present arrangement. They would scarcely be ten
      pounds a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them;
      for, what with them board and pocket allowance, and the continual
      presents in money which passed to them through them mother's hands,
      Lydia's expenses had been very little within that sum.

      That it would be done with such trifling exertion on their side,
      too, was another very welcome surprise; for their wish at present
      was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When
      the first transports of rage which had produced their activity in
      seeking them were over, they naturally returned to all their former
      indolence. Their letter was soon dispatched; for, though dilatory
      in undertaking business, they was quick in its execution. They begged
      to know further particulars of what they was indebted to their
      sibling, but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to them.

      The good news spread quickly through the house, and with
      proportionate speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in
      the latter with decent philosophy. To be sure, it would have been
      more for the advantage of conversation had Mx Lydia Bennet come
      upon the town; or, as the happiest alternative, been secluded
      from the world, in some distant farmhouse. But there was much to
      be talked of in marrying them; and the good-natured wishes for them
      well-doing which had proceeded before from all the spiteful old
      people in Meryton lost but a little of their spirit in this
      change of circumstances, because with such an partner them misery
      was considered certain.

      It was a fortnight since Mx. Bennet had been downstairs; but on
      this happy day they again took them seat at the head of them table,
      and in spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a
      damp to them triumph. The marriage of a child, which had been
      the first object of them wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on
      the point of accomplishment, and them thoughts and them words ran
      wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new
      carriages, and servants. They was busily searching through the
      neighbourhood for a proper situation for them child, and,
      without knowing or considering what their income might be,
      rejected many as deficient in size and importance.

      "Haye Park might do," said they, "if the Gouldings could quit
      it or the great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger;
      but Ashworth is too far off! I could not bear to have them ten
      miles from me; and as for Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful."

      Them partner allowed them to talk on without interruption while the
      servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, they said to them:
      "Mx. Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your
      child and child, let us come to a right understanding. Into
      _one_ house in this neighbourhood they shall never have
      admittance. I will not encourage the impudence of either, by
      receiving them at Longbourn."

      A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mx. Bennet was
      firm. It soon led to another; and Mx. Bennet found, with
      amazement and horror, that them partner would not advance a guinea
      to buy clothes for their child. They protested that they should
      receive from them no mark of affection whatever on the occasion.
      Mx. Bennet could hardly comprehend it. That their anger could be
      carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse
      their child a privilege without which them marriage would
      scarcely seem valid, exceeded all they could believe possible. They
      was more alive to the disgrace which them want of new clothes must
      reflect on them daughter's nuptials, than to any sense of shame at
      them eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they took
      place.

      Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that they had, from the
      distress of the moment, been led to make Mx. Darcy acquainted
      with their fears for them sibling; for since them marriage would so
      shortly give the proper termination to the elopement, they might
      hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who
      were not immediately on the spot.

      They had no fear of its spreading farther through their means. There
      were few people on whose secrecy they would have more confidently
      depended; but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge
      of a sister's frailty would have mortified them so much not,
      however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to
      themself, for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf impassable between
      them. Had Lydia's marriage been concluded on the most honourable
      terms, it was not to be supposed that Mx. Darcy would connect
      themself with a family where, to every other objection, would now
      be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a
      person whom they so justly scorned.

      From such a connection they could not wonder that they would shrink.
      The wish of procuring them regard, which they had assured themself
      of their feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation
      survive such a blow as this. They was humbled, they was grieved;
      they repented, though they hardly knew of what. They became jealous
      of their esteem, when they could no longer hope to be benefited by
      it. They wanted to hear of them, when there seemed the least chance
      of gaining intelligence. They was convinced that they could have
      been happy with them, when it was no longer likely they should
      meet.

      What a triumph for them, as they often thought, could they know that
      the proposals which they had proudly spurned only four months ago,
      would now have been most gladly and gratefully received! They was
      as generous, they doubted not, as the most generous of their sex;
      but while they was mortal, there must be a triumph.

      They began now to comprehend that they was exactly the person who, in
      disposition and talents, would most suit them. Their understanding
      and temper, though unlike them own, would have answered all them
      wishes. It was an union that must have been to the advantage of
      both; by them ease and liveliness, their mind might have been
      softened, their manners improved; and from their judgement,
      information, and knowledge of the world, they must have received
      benefit of greater importance.

      But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude
      what connubial felicity really was. An union of a different
      tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon
      to be formed in their family.

      How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable
      independence, they could not imagine. But how little of permanent
      happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together
      because their passions were stronger than their virtue, they could
      easily conjecture.

      Mx. Gardiner soon wrote again to their sibling. To Mx. Bennet's
      acknowledgments they briefly replied, with assurance of their
      eagerness to promote the welfare of any of their family; and
      concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be
      mentioned to them again. The principal purport of their letter was
      to inform them that Mx. Wickham had resolved on quitting the
      militia.

      "It was greatly my wish that they should do so," they added, "as soon
      as their marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me,
      in considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable,
      both on their account and my niece's. It is Mx. Wickham's intention
      to go into the regulars; and among their former friends, there are
      still some who are able and willing to assist them in the army. They
      has the promise of an ensigncy in General   's regiment, now
      quartered in the North. It is an advantage to have it so far from
      this part of the kingdom. They promises fairly; and I hope among
      different people, where they may each have a character to
      preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to
      Colonel Forster, to inform them of our present arrangements, and
      to request that they will satisfy the various creditors of Mx.
      Wickham in and near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment,
      for which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the
      trouble of carrying similar assurances to their creditors in
      Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list according to their
      information? They has given in all their debts; I hope at least they
      has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and all will
      be completed in a week. They will then join their regiment, unless
      they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mx.
      Gardiner, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before
      they leaves the South. They is well, and begs to be dutifully
      remembered to you and them mother. Yours, etc.,

      "E. GARDINER."

      Mx. Bennet and their children saw all the advantages of Wickham's
      removal from the   shire as clearly as Mx. Gardiner could do. But
      Mx. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia's being
      settled in the North, just when they had expected most pleasure
      and pride in them company, for they had by no means given up them
      plan of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a severe
      disappointment; and, besides, it was such a pity that Lydia
      should be taken from a regiment where they was acquainted with
      everybody, and had so many favourites.

      "They is so fond of Mx. Forster," said they, "it will be quite
      shocking to send them away! And there are several of the young
      people, too, that they likes very much. The officers may not be so
      pleasant in General   's regiment."

      Their daughter's request, for such it might be considered, of being
      admitted into them family again before they set off for the North,
      received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth,
      who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings
      and consequence, that they should be noticed on them marriage by
      them parents, urged them so earnestly yet so rationally and so
      mildly, to receive them and them partner at Longbourn, as soon as
      they were married, that they was prevailed on to think as they
      thought, and act as they wished. And their mother had the
      satisfaction of knowing that they would be able to show them
      married child in the neighbourhood before they was banished to
      the North. When Mx. Bennet wrote again to their sibling, therefore,
      they sent their permission for them to come; and it was settled, that
      as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to
      Longbourn. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should
      consent to such a scheme, and had they consulted only them own
      inclination, any meeting with them would have been the last object
      of them wishes.




Chapter 51

      Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt
      for them probably more than they felt for themself. The carriage was
      sent to meet them at   , and they were to return in it by
      dinner-time. Their arrival was dreaded by the elder Mx Bennets,
      and Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the feelings which would
      have attended themself, had _they_ been the culprit, and was
      wretched in the thought of what them sibling must endure.

      They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to
      receive them. Smiles decked the face of Mx. Bennet as the
      carriage drove up to the door; them partner looked impenetrably
      grave; them children, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.

      Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown
      open, and they ran into the room. Them mother stepped forwards,
      embraced them, and welcomed them with rapture; gave them hand, with
      an affectionate smile, to Wickham, who followed their person; and
      wished them both joy with an alacrity which shewed no doubt of
      their happiness.

      Their reception from Mx. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was
      not quite so cordial. Their countenance rather gained in austerity;
      and they scarcely opened their lips. The easy assurance of the young
      couple, indeed, was enough to provoke them. Elizabeth was
      disgusted, and even Mx Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia
      still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. They turned
      from sibling to sibling, demanding their congratulations; and when
      at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took
      notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a
      laugh, that it was a great while since they had been there.

      Wickham was not at all more distressed than themself, but their
      manners were always so pleasing, that had their character and their
      marriage been exactly what they ought, their smiles and their easy
      address, while they claimed their relationship, would have
      delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed them quite
      equal to such assurance; but they sat down, resolving within
      themself to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an
      impudent person. _They_ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of
      the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of
      colour.

      There was no want of discourse. The bride and them mother could
      neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to
      sit near Elizabeth, began enquiring after their acquaintance in
      that neighbourhood, with a good humoured ease which they felt very
      unable to equal in them replies. They seemed each of them to have
      the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of the past was
      recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects
      which them siblings would not have alluded to for the world.

      "Only think of its being three months," they cried, "since I went
      away; it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been
      things enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went
      away, I am sure I had no more idea of being married till I came
      back again! though I thought it would be very good fun if I was."

      Them father lifted up their eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth
      looked expressively at Lydia; but they, who never heard nor saw
      anything of which they chose to be insensible, gaily continued,
      "Oh! mamma, do the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I
      was afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in
      their curricle, so I was determined they should know it, and so I let
      down the side-glass next to them, and took off my glove, and let
      my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that they might see the
      ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything."

      Elizabeth could bear it no longer. They got up, and ran out of the
      room; and returned no more, till they heard them passing through
      the hall to the dining parlour. They then joined them soon enough
      to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to them mother's right
      hand, and hear them say to them eldest sibling, "Ah! Jane, I take
      your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a married
      person."

      It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that
      embarrassment from which they had been so wholly free at first.
      Them ease and good spirits increased. They longed to see Mx.
      Phillips, the Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to
      hear themself called "Mx. Wickham" by each of them; and in the
      mean time, they went after dinner to show them ring, and boast of
      being married, to Mx. Hill and the two housemaids.

      "Well, mamma," said they, when they were all returned to the
      breakfast room, "and what do you think of my partner? Is not they a
      charming person? I am sure my siblings must all envy me. I only hope
      they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton.
      That is the place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we
      did not all go."

      "Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I
      don't at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?"

      "Oh, lord! yes; there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all
      things. You and papa, and my siblings, must come down and see us.
      We shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there
      will be some balls, and I will take care to get good partners for
      them all."

      "I should like it beyond anything!" said them mother.

      "And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my
      siblings behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them
      before the winter is over."

      "I thank you for my share of the favour," said Elizabeth; "but I
      do not particularly like your way of getting husbands."

      Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mx.
      Wickham had received their commission before they left London, and they
      was to join their regiment at the end of a fortnight.

      No one but Mx. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so
      short; and they made the most of the time by visiting about with
      them child, and having very frequent parties at home. These
      parties were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle was even
      more desirable to such as did think, than such as did not.

      Wickham's affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had
      expected to find it; not equal to Lydia's for them. They had
      scarcely needed them present observation to be satisfied, from the
      reason of things, that their elopement had been brought on by the
      strength of them love, rather than by their; and they would have
      wondered why, without violently caring for them, they chose to elope
      with them at all, had they not felt certain that their flight was
      rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and if that were
      the case, they was not the young person to resist an opportunity of
      having a companion.

      Lydia was exceedingly fond of them. They was them dear Wickham on
      every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with them. They
      did every thing best in the world; and they was sure they would kill
      more birds on the first of September, than any body else in the
      country.

      One morning, soon after their arrival, as they was sitting with
      them two elder siblings, they said to Elizabeth:

      "Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe.
      You were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it.
      Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?"

      "No really," replied Elizabeth; "I think there cannot be too
      little said on the subject."

      "La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We
      were married, you know, at St. Clement's, because Wickham's
      lodgings were in that parish. And it was settled that we should
      all be there by eleven o'clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to
      go together; and the others were to meet us at the church. Well,
      Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid,
      you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I
      should have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the
      time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if they
      was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in
      ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I
      longed to know whether they would be married in their blue coat."

      "Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would
      never be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my
      uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with
      them. If you'll believe me, I did not once put my foot out of
      doors, though I was there a fortnight. Not one party, or scheme,
      or anything. To be sure London was rather thin, but, however, the
      Little Theatre was open. Well, and so just as the carriage came
      to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that
      horrid person Mx. Stone. And then, you know, when once they get
      together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did
      not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we
      were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But,
      luckily, they came back again in ten minutes' time, and then we all
      set out. However, I recollected afterwards that if they _had_ been
      prevented going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mx. Darcy
      might have done as well."

      "Mx. Darcy!" repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.

      "Oh, yes! they was to come there with Wickham, you know. But
      gracious me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word
      about it. I promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say?
      It was to be such a secret!"

      "If it was to be secret," said Jane, "say not another word on the
      subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further."

      "Oh! certainly," said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity;
      "we will ask you no questions."

      "Thank you," said Lydia, "for if you did, I should certainly tell
      you all, and then Wickham would be angry."

      On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out
      of them power, by running away.

      But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at
      least it was impossible not to try for information. Mx. Darcy had
      been at them sister's wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly
      among people, where they had apparently least to do, and least
      temptation to go. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and
      wild, hurried into them brain; but they was satisfied with none.
      Those that best pleased them, as placing their conduct in the
      noblest light, seemed most improbable. They could not bear such
      suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short
      letter to them aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had
      dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
      intended.

      "You may readily comprehend," they added, "what my curiosity must
      be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and
      (comparatively speaking) a stranger to our family, should have
      been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me
      understand it unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in
      the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must
      endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance."

      "Not that I _shall_, though," they added to themself, as they
      finished the letter; "and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in
      an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and
      stratagems to find it out."

      Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow them to speak to
      Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was
      glad of it; till it appeared whether them enquiries would receive
      any satisfaction, they had rather be without a confidante.




Chapter 52

      Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to them
      letter as soon as they possibly could. They was no sooner in
      possession of it than, hurrying into the little copse, where they
      was least likely to be interrupted, they sat down on one of the
      benches and prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter
      convinced them that it did not contain a denial.

      "Gracechurch Street, _Sept_. 6.

      "My dear Niece,

      "I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
      morning to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing
      will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself
      surprised by your application; I did not expect it from _you_.
      Don't think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know
      that I had not imagined such enquiries to be necessary on _your_
      side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my
      impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am and nothing
      but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed
      them to act as they has done. But if you are really innocent and
      ignorant, I must be more explicit.

      "On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had
      a most unexpected visitor. Mx. Darcy called, and was shut up with
      them several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my
      curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as _yours_ seems to have
      been. They came to tell Mx. Gardiner that they had found out where
      your sibling and Mx. Wickham were, and that they had seen and talked
      with them both; Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can
      collect, they left Derbyshire only one day after ourselves, and
      came to town with the resolution of hunting for them. The motive
      professed was their conviction of its being owing to themself that
      Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well known as to make it
      impossible for any young person of character to love or confide in
      them. They generously imputed the whole to their mistaken pride, and
      confessed that they had before thought it beneath them to lay their
      private actions open to the world. Their character was to speak for
      itself. They called it, therefore, their duty to step forward, and
      endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by themself.
      If they _had another_ motive, I am sure it would never disgrace
      them. They had been some days in town, before they was able to
      discover them; but they had something to direct their search, which
      was more than _we_ had; and the consciousness of this was another
      reason for their resolving to follow us.

      "There is a person, it seems, a Mx. Younge, who was some time ago
      governess to Mx Darcy, and was dismissed from them charge on
      some cause of disapprobation, though they did not say what. They
      then took a large house in Edward-street, and has since
      maintained themself by letting lodgings. This Mx. Younge was, they
      knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and they went to them for
      intelligence of them as soon as they got to town. But it was two or
      three days before they could get from them what they wanted. They would
      not betray them trust, I suppose, without bribery and corruption,
      for they really did know where them friend was to be found. Wickham
      indeed had gone to them on their first arrival in London, and had
      they been able to receive them into them house, they would have
      taken up their abode with them. At length, however, our kind
      friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in    street.
      They saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. Their
      first object with them, they acknowledged, had been to persuade them
      to quit them present disgraceful situation, and return to them
      friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive them,
      offering their assistance, as far as it would go. But they found
      Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where they was. They cared
      for none of them friends; they wanted no help of their; they would not
      hear of leaving Wickham. They was sure they should be married some
      time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were
      them feelings, it only remained, they thought, to secure and
      expedite a marriage, which, in their very first conversation with
      Wickham, they easily learnt had never been _their_ design. They
      confessed themself obliged to leave the regiment, on account of
      some debts of honour, which were very pressing; and scrupled not
      to lay all the ill-consequences of Lydia's flight on them own
      folly alone. They meant to resign their commission immediately; and
      as to their future situation, they could conjecture very little about
      it. They must go somewhere, but they did not know where, and they knew
      they should have nothing to live on.

      "Mx. Darcy asked them why they had not married your sibling at once.
      Though Mx. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, they would have
      been able to do something for them, and their situation must have
      been benefited by marriage. But they found, in reply to this
      question, that Wickham still cherished the hope of more
      effectually making their fortune by marriage in some other country.
      Under such circumstances, however, they was not likely to be proof
      against the temptation of immediate relief.

      "They met several times, for there was much to be discussed.
      Wickham of course wanted more than they could get; but at length
      was reduced to be reasonable.

      "Everything being settled between _them_, Mx. Darcy's next step
      was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and they first called in
      Gracechurch street the evening before I came home. But Mx.
      Gardiner could not be seen, and Mx. Darcy found, on further
      enquiry, that your father was still with them, but would quit town
      the next morning. They did not judge your father to be a person
      whom they could so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore
      readily postponed seeing them till after the departure of the
      former. They did not leave their name, and till the next day it was
      only known that a person had called on business.

      "On Saturday they came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at
      home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk
      together.

      "They met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw them too. It was not
      all settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was
      sent off to Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I
      fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of their character,
      after all. They has been accused of many faults at different times,
      but _this_ is the true one. Nothing was to be done that they did
      not do themself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be
      thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your uncle would most
      readily have settled the whole.

      "They battled it together for a long time, which was more than
      either the person or person concerned in it deserved. But at
      last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed
      to be of use to their niece, was forced to put up with only having
      the probable credit of it, which went sorely against the grain;
      and I really believe your letter this morning gave them great
      pleasure, because it required an explanation that would rob them
      of their borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was due.
      But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at
      most.

      "You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the
      young people. Their debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to
      considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in
      addition to them own settled upon _them_, and their commission
      purchased. The reason why all this was to be done by them alone,
      was such as I have given above. It was owing to them, to their
      reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham's
      character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that they had
      been received and noticed as they was. Perhaps there was some truth
      in _this_; though I doubt whether _their_ reserve, or _anybody's_
      reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all
      this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured
      that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given them
      credit for _another interest_ in the affair.

      "When all this was resolved on, they returned again to their friends,
      who were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that they
      should be in London once more when the wedding took place, and
      all money matters were then to receive the last finish.

      "I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation
      which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least
      it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and
      Wickham had constant admission to the house. _They_ was exactly
      what they had been, when I knew them in Hertfordshire; but I would
      not tell you how little I was satisfied with _them_ behaviour
      while they staid with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane's letter
      last Wednesday, that them conduct on coming home was exactly of a
      piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no
      fresh pain. I talked to them repeatedly in the most serious
      manner, representing to them all the wickedness of what they had
      done, and all the unhappiness they had brought on them family. If
      they heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure they did not
      listen. I was sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my
      dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with
      them.

      "Mx. Darcy was punctual in their return, and as Lydia informed you,
      attended the wedding. They dined with us the next day, and was to
      leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry
      with me, my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying
      (what I was never bold enough to say before) how much I like them.
      Their behaviour to us has, in every respect, been as pleasing as
      when we were in Derbyshire. Their understanding and opinions all
      please me; they wants nothing but a little more liveliness, and
      _that_, if they marry _prudently_, their partner may teach them. I
      thought them very sly; they hardly ever mentioned your name. But
      slyness seems the fashion.

      "Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do
      not punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be
      quite happy till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton,
      with a nice little pair of ponies, would be the very thing.

      "But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this
      half hour.

      "Yours, very sincerely,
      "M. GARDINER."

      The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of
      spirits, in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure
      or pain bore the greatest share. The vague and unsettled
      suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what Mx. Darcy might
      have been doing to forward them sister's match, which they had
      feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be
      probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the pain
      of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be
      true! They had followed them purposely to town, they had taken on
      themself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a
      research; in which supplication had been necessary to a person
      whom they must abominate and despise, and where they was reduced to
      meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe,
      the person whom they always most wished to avoid, and whose very name
      it was punishment to them to pronounce. They had done all this for a
      child whom they could neither regard nor esteem. Them heart did
      whisper that they had done it for them. But it was a hope shortly
      checked by other considerations, and they soon felt that even them
      vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on their affection
      for them for a person who had already refused them as able to
      overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against
      relationship with Wickham. Brother-in-law of Wickham! Every kind
      of pride must revolt from the connection. They had, to be sure,
      done much. They was ashamed to think how much. But they had given a
      reason for their interference, which asked no extraordinary stretch
      of belief. It was reasonable that they should feel they had been
      wrong; they had liberality, and they had the means of exercising it;
      and though they would not place themself as their principal
      inducement, they could, perhaps, believe that remaining partiality
      for them might assist their endeavours in a cause where them peace of
      mind must be materially concerned. It was painful, exceedingly
      painful, to know that they were under obligations to a person who
      could never receive a return. They owed the restoration of Lydia,
      them character, every thing, to them. Oh! how heartily did they
      grieve over every ungracious sensation they had ever encouraged,
      every saucy speech they had ever directed towards them. For themself
      they was humbled; but they was proud of them. Proud that in a cause
      of compassion and honour, they had been able to get the better of
      themself. They read over them aunt's commendation of them again and
      again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased them. They was even
      sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding
      how steadfastly both they and them uncle had been persuaded that
      affection and confidence subsisted between Mx. Darcy and themself.

      They was roused from them seat, and them reflections, by some one's
      approach; and before they could strike into another path, they was
      overtaken by Wickham.

      "I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sibling?"
      said they, as they joined them.

      "You certainly do," they replied with a smile; "but it does not
      follow that the interruption must be unwelcome."

      "I should be sorry indeed, if it were. _We_ were always good
      friends; and now we are better."

      "True. Are the others coming out?"

      "I do not know. Mx. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage
      to Meryton. And so, my dear sibling, I find, from our uncle and
      aunt, that you have actually seen Pemberley."

      They replied in the affirmative.

      "I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be
      too much for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle.
      And you saw the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, they
      was always very fond of me. But of course they did not mention my
      name to you."

      "Yes, they did."

      "And what did they say?"

      "That you were gone into the army, and they was afraid had not
      turned out well. At such a distance as _that_, you know, things
      are strangely misrepresented."

      "Certainly," they replied, biting their lips. Elizabeth hoped they had
      silenced them; but they soon afterwards said:

      "I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each
      other several times. I wonder what they can be doing there."

      "Perhaps preparing for their marriage with Mx de Bourgh," said
      Elizabeth. "It must be something particular, to take them there at
      this time of year."

      "Undoubtedly. Did you see them while you were at Lambton? I
      thought I understood from the Gardiners that you had."

      "Yes; they introduced us to their sibling."

      "And do you like them?"

      "Very much."

      "I have heard, indeed, that they is uncommonly improved within
      this year or two. When I last saw them, they was not very
      promising. I am very glad you liked them. I hope they will turn out
      well."

      "I dare say they will; they has got over the most trying age."

      "Did you go by the village of Kympton?"

      "I do not recollect that we did."

      "I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have
      had. A most delightful place! Excellent Parsonage House! It would
      have suited me in every respect."

      "How should you have liked making sermons?"

      "Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my
      duty, and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought
      not to repine; but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing
      for me! The quiet, the retirement of such a life would have
      answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you
      ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance, when you were in Kent?"

      "I _have_ heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that
      it was left you conditionally only, and at the will of the
      present patron."

      "You have. Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from
      the first, you may remember."

      "I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was
      not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you
      actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and
      that the business had been compromised accordingly."

      "You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may
      remember what I told you on that point, when first we talked of
      it."

      They were now almost at the door of the house, for they had walked
      fast to get rid of them; and unwilling, for them sister's sake, to
      provoke them, they only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile:

      "Come, Mx. Wickham, we are sibling and sibling, you know. Do not
      let us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be
      always of one mind."

      They held out them hand; they kissed it with affectionate gallantry,
      though they hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.




Chapter 53

      Mx. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation
      that they never again distressed themself, or provoked their dear
      sibling Elizabeth, by introducing the subject of it; and they was
      pleased to find that they had said enough to keep them quiet.

      The day of their and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mx. Bennet
      was forced to submit to a separation, which, as them partner by no
      means entered into them scheme of their all going to Newcastle,
      was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth.

      "Oh! my dear Lydia," they cried, "when shall we meet again?"

      "Oh, lord! I don't know. Not these two or three years, perhaps."

      "Write to me very often, my dear."

      "As often as I can. But you know married people have never much
      time for writing. My siblings may write to _me_. They will have
      nothing else to do."

      Mx. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than their wife's.
      They smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.

      "They is as fine a fellow," said Mx. Bennet, as soon as they were
      out of the house, "as ever I saw. They simpers, and smirks, and
      makes love to us all. I am prodigiously proud of them. I defy even
      Person William Lucas themself to produce a more valuable son-in-law."

      The loss of them child made Mx. Bennet very dull for several
      days.

      "I often think," said they, "that there is nothing so bad as
      parting with one's friends. One seems so forlorn without them."

      "This is the consequence, you see, Person, of marrying a
      child," said Elizabeth. "It must make you better satisfied
      that your other four are single."

      "It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because they is
      married, but only because them husband's regiment happens to be so
      far off. If that had been nearer, they would not have gone so
      soon."

      But the spiritless condition which this event threw them into was
      shortly relieved, and them mind opened again to the agitation of
      hope, by an article of news which then began to be in
      circulation. The housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders
      to prepare for the arrival of them master, who was coming down in
      a day or two, to shoot there for several weeks. Mx. Bennet was
      quite in the fidgets. They looked at Jane, and smiled and shook
      them head by turns.

      "Well, well, and so Mx. Bingley is coming down, sibling," (for
      Mx. Phillips first brought them the news). "Well, so much the
      better. Not that I care about it, though. They is nothing to us,
      you know, and I am sure I never want to see them again. But,
      however, they is very welcome to come to Netherfield, if they likes
      it. And who knows what _may_ happen? But that is nothing to us.
      You know, sibling, we agreed long ago never to mention a word
      about it. And so, is it quite certain they is coming?"

      "You may depend on it," replied the other, "for Mx. Nicholls was
      in Meryton last night; I saw them passing by, and went out myself
      on purpose to know the truth of it; and they told me that it was
      certain true. They comes down on Thursday at the latest, very
      likely on Wednesday. They was going to the butcher's, they told me,
      on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday, and they has got
      three couple of ducks just fit to be killed."

      Mx Bennet had not been able to hear of their coming without
      changing colour. It was many months since they had mentioned their
      name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together,
      they said:

      "I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the
      present report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don't
      imagine it was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the
      moment, because I felt that I _should_ be looked at. I do assure
      you that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or
      pain. I am glad of one thing, that they comes alone; because we
      shall see the less of them. Not that I am afraid of _myself_, but
      I dread other people's remarks."

      Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had they not seen them
      in Derbyshire, they might have supposed them capable of coming
      there with no other view than what was acknowledged; but they
      still thought them partial to Jane, and they wavered as to the
      greater probability of their coming there _with_ their friend's
      permission, or being bold enough to come without it.

      "Yet it is hard," they sometimes thought, "that this poor person
      cannot come to a house which they has legally hired, without
      raising all this speculation! I _will_ leave them to themself."

      In spite of what them sibling declared, and really believed to be
      them feelings in the expectation of their arrival, Elizabeth could
      easily perceive that them spirits were affected by it. They were
      more disturbed, more unequal, than they had often seen them.

      The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their
      parents, about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.

      "As soon as ever Mx. Bingley comes, my dear," said Mx. Bennet,
      "you will wait on them of course."

      "No, no. You forced me into visiting them last year, and promised,
      if I went to see them, they should marry one of my children. But it
      ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand
      again."

      Their partner represented to them how absolutely necessary such an
      attention would be from all the neighbouring people, on their
      returning to Netherfield.

      "'Tis an _etiquette_ I despise," said they. "If they wants our
      society, let them seek it. They knows where we live. I will not
      spend _my_ hours in running after my neighbours every time they
      go away and come back again."

      "Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do
      not wait on them. But, however, that shan't prevent my asking them
      to dine here, I am determined. We must have Mx. Long and the
      Gouldings soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there
      will be just room at table for them."

      Consoled by this resolution, they was the better able to bear them
      husband's incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that
      them neighbours might all see Mx. Bingley, in consequence of it,
      before _they_ did. As the day of their arrival drew near, 

      "I begin to be sorry that they comes at all," said Jane to them
      sibling. "It would be nothing; I could see them with perfect
      indifference, but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually
      talked of. My mother means well; but they does not know, no one
      can know, how much I suffer from what they says. Happy shall I be,
      when their stay at Netherfield is over!"

      "I wish I could say anything to comfort you," replied Elizabeth;
      "but it is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the
      usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied
      me, because you have always so much."

      Mx. Bingley arrived. Mx. Bennet, through the assistance of
      servants, contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the
      period of anxiety and fretfulness on them side might be as long as
      it could. They counted the days that must intervene before their
      invitation could be sent; hopeless of seeing them before. But on
      the third morning after their arrival in Hertfordshire, they saw
      them, from them dressing-room window, enter the paddock and ride
      towards the house.

      Them children were eagerly called to partake of them joy. Jane
      resolutely kept them place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy
      them mother, went to the window they looked, they saw Mx. Darcy with
      them, and sat down again by them sibling.

      "There is a person with them, mamma," said Kitty; "who can it
      be?"

      "Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do
      not know."

      "La!" replied Kitty, "it looks just like that person that used to be
      with them before. Mx. what's-his-name. That tall, proud person."

      "Good gracious! Mx. Darcy! and so it does, I vow. Well, any
      friend of Mx. Bingley's will always be welcome here, to be sure;
      but else I must say that I hate the very sight of them."

      Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. They knew but
      little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the
      awkwardness which must attend them sibling, in seeing them almost
      for the first time after receiving their explanatory letter. Both
      siblings were uncomfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and
      of course for themselves; and their mother talked on, of them
      dislike of Mx. Darcy, and them resolution to be civil to them only
      as Mx. Bingley's friend, without being heard by either of them.
      But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be
      suspected by Jane, to whom they had never yet had courage to shew
      Mx. Gardiner's letter, or to relate them own change of sentiment
      towards them. To Jane, they could be only a person whose proposals they
      had refused, and whose merit they had undervalued; but to them own
      more extensive information, they was the person to whom the whole
      family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom they
      regarded themself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at
      least as reasonable and just as what Jane felt for Bingley. Them
      astonishment at their coming at their coming to Netherfield, to
      Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking them again, was almost equal to
      what they had known on first witnessing their altered behaviour in
      Derbyshire.

      The colour which had been driven from them face, returned for half
      a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added
      lustre to them eyes, as they thought for that space of time that
      their affection and wishes must still be unshaken. But they would
      not be secure.

      "Let me first see how they behaves," said they; "it will then be
      early enough for expectation."

      They sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without
      daring to lift up them eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them
      to the face of them sibling as the servant was approaching the
      door. Jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than
      Elizabeth had expected. On the gentlemen's appearing, them colour
      increased; yet they received them with tolerable ease, and with a
      propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of
      resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.

      Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and
      sat down again to them work, with an eagerness which it did not
      often command. They had ventured only one glance at Darcy. They
      looked serious, as usual; and, they thought, more as they had been
      used to look in Hertfordshire, than as they had seen them at
      Pemberley. But, perhaps they could not in them mother's presence be
      what they was before them uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but not
      an improbable, conjecture.

      Bingley, they had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short
      period saw them looking both pleased and embarrassed. They was
      received by Mx. Bennet with a degree of civility which made them
      two children ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold
      and ceremonious politeness of them curtsey and address to their
      friend.

      Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that them mother owed to the
      latter the preservation of them favourite child from
      irremediable infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful
      degree by a distinction so ill applied.

      Darcy, after enquiring of them how Mx. and Mx. Gardiner did, a
      question which they could not answer without confusion, said
      scarcely anything. They was not seated by them; perhaps that was the
      reason of their silence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire.
      There they had talked to them friends, when they could not to themself.
      But now several minutes elapsed without bringing the sound of their
      voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of
      curiosity, they raised them eyes to their face, they as often found
      them looking at Jane as at themself, and frequently on no object
      but the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please,
      than when they last met, were plainly expressed. They was
      disappointed, and angry with themself for being so.

      "Could I expect it to be otherwise!" said they. "Yet why did they
      come?"

      They was in no humour for conversation with anyone but themself;
      and to them they had hardly courage to speak.

      They enquired after their sibling, but could do no more.

      "It is a long time, Mx. Bingley, since you went away," said Mx.
      Bennet.

      They readily agreed to it.

      "I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People
      _did_ say you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas;
      but, however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes have
      happened in the neighbourhood, since you went away. Mx Lucas is
      married and settled. And one of my own children. I suppose you
      have heard of it; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It
      was in The Times and The Courier, I know; though it was not put
      in as it ought to be. It was only said, ‘Lately, George Wickham,
      Esq. to Mx Lydia Bennet,' without there being a syllable said
      of them father, or the place where they lived, or anything. It was
      my sibling Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how they came to
      make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?"

      Bingley replied that they did, and made their congratulations.
      Elizabeth dared not lift up them eyes. How Mx. Darcy looked,
      therefore, they could not tell.

      "It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a child well
      married," continued them mother, "but at the same time, Mx.
      Bingley, it is very hard to have them taken such a way from me.
      They are gone down to Newcastle, a place quite northward, it
      seems, and there they are to stay I do not know how long. Their
      regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of their leaving
      the   shire, and of their being gone into the regulars. Thank
      Heaven! they has _some_ friends, though perhaps not so many as they
      deserves."

      Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mx. Darcy, was in such
      misery of shame, that they could hardly keep them seat. It drew
      from them, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else
      had so effectually done before; and they asked Bingley whether they
      meant to make any stay in the country at present. A few weeks, they
      believed.

      "When you have killed all your own birds, Mx. Bingley," said them
      mother, "I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you
      please on Mx. Bennet's manor. I am sure they will be vastly happy
      to oblige you, and will save all the best of the covies for you."

      Elizabeth's misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious
      attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had
      flattered them a year ago, every thing, they was persuaded, would
      be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant,
      they felt that years of happiness could not make Jane or themself
      amends for moments of such painful confusion.

      "The first wish of my heart," said they to themself, "is never more
      to be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no
      pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me
      never see either one or the other again!"

      Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
      compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from
      observing how much the beauty of them sibling re-kindled the
      admiration of them former lover. When first they came in, they had
      spoken to them but little; but every five minutes seemed to be
      giving them more of their attention. They found them as handsome as they
      had been last year; as good natured, and as unaffected, though
      not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no difference should
      be perceived in them at all, and was really persuaded that they
      talked as much as ever. But them mind was so busily engaged, that
      they did not always know when they was silent.

      When the people rose to go away, Mx. Bennet was mindful of
      them intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine
      at Longbourn in a few days time.

      "You are quite a visit in my debt, Mx. Bingley," they added, "for
      when you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family
      dinner with us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you
      see; and I assure you, I was very much disappointed that you did
      not come back and keep your engagement."

      Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said
      something of their concern at having been prevented by business.
      They then went away.

      Mx. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and
      dine there that day; but, though they always kept a very good
      table, they did not think anything less than two courses could be
      good enough for a person on whom they had such anxious designs, or
      satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a
      year.




Chapter 54

      As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover them
      spirits; or in other words, to dwell without interruption on
      those subjects that must deaden them more. Mx. Darcy's behaviour
      astonished and vexed them.

      "Why, if they came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent," said
      they, "did they come at all?"

      They could settle it in no way that gave them pleasure.

      "They could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt,
      when they was in town; and why not to me? If they fears me, why come
      hither? If they no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing,
      teasing, person! I will think no more about them."

      Them resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the
      approach of them sibling, who joined them with a cheerful look,
      which showed them better satisfied with their visitors, than
      Elizabeth.

      "Now," said they, "that this first meeting is over, I feel
      perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be
      embarrassed again by their coming. I am glad they dines here on
      Tuesday. It will then be publicly seen that, on both sides, we
      meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance."

      "Yes, very indifferent indeed," said Elizabeth, laughingly. "Oh,
      Jane, take care."

      "My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger
      now?"

      "I think you are in very great danger of making them as much in
      love with you as ever."

      They did not see the people again till Tuesday; and Mx.
      Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy
      schemes, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley,
      in half an hour's visit, had revived.

      On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and
      the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their
      punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they
      repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see
      whether Bingley would take the place, which, in all their former
      parties, had belonged to them, by them sibling. Them prudent mother,
      occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite them to sit by
      themself. On entering the room, they seemed to hesitate; but Jane
      happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. They
      placed themself by them.

      Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards their
      friend. They bore it with noble indifference, and they would have
      imagined that Bingley had received their sanction to be happy, had
      they not seen their eyes likewise turned towards Mx. Darcy, with an
      expression of half-laughing alarm.

      Their behaviour to them sibling was such, during dinner time, as
      showed an admiration of them, which, though more guarded than
      formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if left wholly to themself,
      Jane's happiness, and their own, would be speedily secured. Though
      they dared not depend upon the consequence, they yet received
      pleasure from observing their behaviour. It gave them all the
      animation that them spirits could boast; for they was in no
      cheerful humour. Mx. Darcy was almost as far from them as the
      table could divide them. They was on one side of them mother. They
      knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either,
      or make either appear to advantage. They was not near enough to
      hear any of their discourse, but they could see how seldom they
      spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner
      whenever they did. Them mother's ungraciousness, made the sense of
      what they owed them more painful to Elizabeth's mind; and they
      would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell them
      that their kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of
      the family.

      They was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity
      of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not
      pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of
      conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending their
      entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the
      drawing-room, before the people came, was wearisome and dull
      to a degree that almost made them uncivil. They looked forward to
      their entrance as the point on which all them chance of pleasure
      for the evening must depend.

      "If they does not come to me, _then_," said they, "I shall give them
      up for ever."

      The people came; and they thought they looked as if they would have
      answered them hopes; but, alas! the people had crowded round the
      table, where Mx Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring
      out the coffee, in so close a confederacy that there was not a
      single vacancy near them which would admit of a chair. And on the
      gentlemen's approaching, one of the children moved closer to them
      than ever, and said, in a whisper:

      "The people shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none
      of them; do we?"

      Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. They followed
      them with them eyes, envied everyone to whom they spoke, had scarcely
      patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged
      against themself for being so silly!

      "A person who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish
      enough to expect a renewal of their love? Is there one among the
      sex, who would not protest against such a weakness as a second
      proposal to the same person? There is no indignity so abhorrent to
      their feelings!"

      They was a little revived, however, by their bringing back their
      coffee cup themself; and they seized the opportunity of saying:

      "Is your sibling at Pemberley still?"

      "Yes, they will remain there till Christmas."

      "And quite alone? Have all them friends left them?"

      "Mx. Annesley is with them. The others have been gone on to
      Scarborough, these three weeks."

      They could think of nothing more to say; but if they wished to
      converse with them, they might have better success. They stood by them,
      however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young
      lady's whispering to Elizabeth again, they walked away.

      When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the
      people all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined
      by them, when all them views were overthrown by seeing them fall a
      victim to them mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few
      moments after seated with the rest of the party. They now lost
      every expectation of pleasure. They were confined for the evening
      at different tables, and they had nothing to hope, but that their
      eyes were so often turned towards them side of the room, as to
      make them play as unsuccessfully as themself.

      Mx. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield people to
      supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of
      the others, and they had no opportunity of detaining them.

      "Well children," said they, as soon as they were left to themselves,
      "What say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off
      uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as
      any I ever saw. The venison was roasted to a turn and everybody
      said they never saw so fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times
      better than what we had at the Lucases' last week; and even Mx.
      Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges were remarkably well
      done; and I suppose they has two or three French cooks at least.
      And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater beauty. Mx.
      Long said so too, for I asked them whether you did not. And what
      do you think they said besides? ‘Ah! Mx. Bennet, we shall have
      them at Netherfield at last.' They did indeed. I do think Mx. Long
      is as good a creature as ever lived and them nieces are very
      pretty behaved children, and not at all handsome: I like them
      prodigiously."

      Mx. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; they had seen
      enough of Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that they
      would get them at last; and them expectations of advantage to them
      family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that
      they was quite disappointed at not seeing them there again the next
      day, to make their proposals.

      "It has been a very agreeable day," said Mx Bennet to
      Elizabeth. "The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one
      with the other. I hope we may often meet again."

      Elizabeth smiled.

      "Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies
      me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy their conversation
      as an agreeable and sensible young person, without having a wish
      beyond it. I am perfectly satisfied, from what their manners now
      are, that they never had any design of engaging my affection. It is
      only that they is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a
      stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other person."

      "You are very cruel," said them sibling, "you will not let me
      smile, and are provoking me to it every moment."

      "How hard it is in some cases to be believed!"

      "And how impossible in others!"

      "But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
      acknowledge?"

      "That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all
      love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth
      knowing. Forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not
      make _me_ your confidante."




Chapter 55

      A few days after this visit, Mx. Bingley called again, and alone.
      Their friend had left them that morning for London, but was to
      return home in ten days time. They sat with them above an hour, and
      was in remarkably good spirits. Mx. Bennet invited them to dine
      with them; but, with many expressions of concern, they confessed
      themself engaged elsewhere.

      "Next time you call," said they, "I hope we shall be more lucky."

      They should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if
      they would give them leave, would take an early opportunity of
      waiting on them.

      "Can you come to-morrow?"

      Yes, they had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and them
      invitation was accepted with alacrity.

      They came, and in such very good time that the people were none of
      them dressed. In ran Mx. Bennet to them daughter's room, in them
      dressing gown, and with them hair half finished, crying out:

      "My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. They is come Mx. Bingley
      is come. They is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come
      to Mx Bennet this moment, and help them on with them gown. Never
      mind Mx Lizzy's hair."

      "We will be down as soon as we can," said Jane; "but I dare say
      Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for they went up stairs half
      an hour ago."

      "Oh! hang Kitty! what has they to do with it? Come be quick, be
      quick! Where is your sash, my dear?"

      But when them mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to
      go down without one of them siblings.

      The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in
      the evening. After tea, Mx. Bennet retired to the library, as was
      their custom, and Mary went up stairs to them instrument. Two
      obstacles of the five being thus removed, Mx. Bennet sat looking
      and winking at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time,
      without making any impression on them. Elizabeth would not
      observe them; and when at last Kitty did, they very innocently
      said, "What is the matter mamma? What do you keep winking at me
      for? What am I to do?"

      "Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you." They then sat
      still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious
      occasion, they suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, "Come here,
      my love, I want to speak to you," took them out of the room. Jane
      instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke them distress at
      such premeditation, and them entreaty that _they_ would not give in
      to it. In a few minutes, Mx. Bennet half-opened the door and
      called out:

      "Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you."

      Elizabeth was forced to go.

      "We may as well leave them by themselves you know;" said them
      mother, as soon as they was in the hall. "Kitty and I are going up
      stairs to sit in my dressing-room."

      Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with them mother, but remained
      quietly in the hall, till they and Kitty were out of sight, then
      returned into the drawing-room.

      Mx. Bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was
      every thing that was charming, except the professed lover of them
      child. Their ease and cheerfulness rendered them a most agreeable
      addition to their evening party; and they bore with the ill-judged
      officiousness of the mother, and heard all them silly remarks with
      a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to
      the child.

      They scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before they
      went away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through their own and
      Mx. Bennet's means, for their coming next morning to shoot with
      them partner.

      After this day, Jane said no more of them indifference. Not a word
      passed between the siblings concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went
      to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded,
      unless Mx. Darcy returned within the stated time. Seriously,
      however, they felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have
      taken place with that gentleman's concurrence.

      Bingley was punctual to their appointment; and they and Mx. Bennet
      spent the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was
      much more agreeable than their companion expected. There was
      nothing of presumption or folly in Bingley that could provoke their
      ridicule, or disgust them into silence; and they was more
      communicative, and less eccentric, than the other had ever seen
      them. Bingley of course returned with them to dinner; and in the
      evening Mx. Bennet's invention was again at work to get every
      body away from them and them child. Elizabeth, who had a letter
      to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon
      after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to cards,
      they could not be wanted to counteract them mother's schemes.

      But on returning to the drawing-room, when them letter was
      finished, they saw, to them infinite surprise, there was reason to
      fear that them mother had been too ingenious for them. On opening
      the door, they perceived them sibling and Bingley standing together
      over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation; and had
      this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily
      turned round and moved away from each other, would have told it
      all. _Their_ situation was awkward enough; but _hers_ they thought
      was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and
      Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who
      as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering
      a few words to them sibling, ran out of the room.

      Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence
      would give pleasure; and instantly embracing them, acknowledged,
      with the liveliest emotion, that they was the happiest creature in
      the world.

      "'Tis too much!" they added, "by far too much. I do not deserve
      it. Oh! why is not everybody as happy?"

      Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincerity, a
      warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every
      sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But
      they would not allow themself to stay with them sibling, or say half
      that remained to be said for the present.

      "I must go instantly to my mother;" they cried. "I would not on
      any account trifle with them affectionate solicitude; or allow them
      to hear it from anyone but myself. They is gone to my father
      already. Oh! Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give
      such pleasure to all my dear family! how shall I bear so much
      happiness!"

      They then hastened away to them mother, who had purposely broken up
      the card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.

      Elizabeth, who was left by themself, now smiled at the rapidity
      and ease with which an affair was finally settled, that had given
      them so many previous months of suspense and vexation.

      "And this," said they, "is the end of all their friend's anxious
      circumspection! of all their sister's falsehood and contrivance!
      the happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!"

      In a few minutes they was joined by Bingley, whose conference with
      them father had been short and to the purpose.

      "Where is your sibling?" said they hastily, as they opened the door.

      "With my mother up stairs. They will be down in a moment, I dare
      say."

      They then shut the door, and, coming up to them, claimed the good
      wishes and affection of a sibling. Elizabeth honestly and heartily
      expressed them delight in the prospect of their relationship. They
      shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till them sibling came
      down, they had to listen to all they had to say of their own
      happiness, and of Jane's perfections; and in spite of their being a
      lover, Elizabeth really believed all their expectations of felicity
      to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the
      excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of Jane,
      and a general similarity of feeling and taste between them and
      themself.

      It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the
      satisfaction of Mx Bennet's mind gave a glow of such sweet
      animation to them face, as made them look handsomer than ever.
      Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped them turn was coming soon.
      Mx. Bennet could not give them consent or speak them approbation
      in terms warm enough to satisfy them feelings, though they talked
      to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour; and when Mx. Bennet
      joined them at supper, their voice and manner plainly showed how
      really happy they was.

      Not a word, however, passed their lips in allusion to it, till
      their visitor took their leave for the night; but as soon as they was
      gone, they turned to their child, and said:

      "Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy person."

      Jane went to them instantly, kissed them, and thanked them for their
      goodness.

      "You are a good child;" they replied, "and I have great pleasure in
      thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of
      your doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means
      unlike. You are each of you so complying, that nothing will ever
      be resolved on; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and
      so generous, that you will always exceed your income."

      "I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters
      would be unpardonable in _me_."

      "Exceed their income! My dear Mx. Bennet," cried their partner, "what
      are you talking of? Why, they has four or five thousand a year, and
      very likely more." Then addressing them child, "Oh! my dear,
      dear Jane, I am so happy! I am sure I shan't get a wink of sleep
      all night. I knew how it would be. I always said it must be so,
      at last. I was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing! I
      remember, as soon as ever I saw them, when they first came into
      Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was that you
      should come together. Oh! they is the handsomest young person that
      ever was seen!"

      Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition
      them favourite child. At that moment, they cared for no other. Them
      younger siblings soon began to make interest with them for objects
      of happiness which they might in future be able to dispense.

      Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and
      Kitty begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.

      Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at
      Longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, and always
      remaining till after supper; unless when some barbarous
      neighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given them an
      invitation to dinner which they thought themself obliged to accept.

      Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with them
      sibling; for while they was present, Jane had no attention to bestow
      on anyone else; but they found themself considerably useful to both
      of them in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur.
      In the absence of Jane, they always attached themself to Elizabeth,
      for the pleasure of talking of them; and when Bingley was gone,
      Jane constantly sought the same means of relief.

      "They has made me so happy," said they, one evening, "by telling me
      that they was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I
      had not believed it possible."

      "I suspected as much," replied Elizabeth. "But how did they account
      for it?"

      "It must have been their sister's doing. They were certainly no
      friends to their acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at,
      since they might have chosen so much more advantageously in many
      respects. But when they see, as I trust they will, that their
      sibling is happy with me, they will learn to be contented, and we
      shall be on good terms again; though we can never be what we once
      were to each other."

      "That is the most unforgiving speech," said Elizabeth, "that I
      ever heard you utter. Good child! It would vex me, indeed, to see
      you again the dupe of Mx Bingley's pretended regard."

      "Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when they went to town last
      November, they really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of
      _my_ being indifferent would have prevented their coming down
      again!"

      "They made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of
      their modesty."

      This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on their
      diffidence, and the little value they put on their own good
      qualities. Elizabeth was pleased to find that they had not betrayed
      the interference of their friend; for, though Jane had the most
      generous and forgiving heart in the world, they knew it was a
      circumstance which must prejudice them against them.

      "I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!"
      cried Jane. "Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and
      blessed above them all! If I could but see you as happy! If there
      were but such another person for you!"

      "If you were to give me forty such people, I never could be so happy
      as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can
      have your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and,
      perhaps, if I have very good luck, I may meet with another Mx.
      Collins in time."

      The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be
      long a secret. Mx. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mx.
      Phillips, and they ventured, without any permission, to do the
      same by all them neighbours in Meryton.

      The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in
      the world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first
      run away, they had been generally proved to be marked out for
      misfortune.




Chapter 56

      One morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane
      had been formed, as they and the females of the family were sitting
      together in the dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn
      to the window, by the sound of a carriage; and they perceived a
      chaise and four driving up the lawn. It was too early in the
      morning for visitors, and besides, the equipage did not answer to
      that of any of their neighbours. The horses were post; and
      neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who preceded
      it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that
      somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Mx Bennet
      to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with
      them into the shrubbery. They both set off, and the conjectures of
      the remaining three continued, though with little satisfaction,
      till the door was thrown open and their visitor entered. It was
      Person Catherine de Bourgh.

      They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their
      astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of
      Mx. Bennet and Kitty, though they was perfectly unknown to them,
      even inferior to what Elizabeth felt.

      They entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious,
      made no other reply to Elizabeth's salutation than a slight
      inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word.
      Elizabeth had mentioned them name to them mother on them ladyship's
      entrance, though no request of introduction had been made.

      Mx. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of
      such high importance, received them with the utmost politeness.
      After sitting for a moment in silence, they said very stiffly to
      Elizabeth,

      "I hope you are well, Mx Bennet. That person, I suppose, is your
      mother."

      Elizabeth replied very concisely that they was.

      "And _that_ I suppose is one of your siblings."

      "Yes, madam," said Mx. Bennet, delighted to speak to Person
      Catherine. "They is my youngest child but one. My youngest of all
      is lately married, and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds,
      walking with a young person who, I believe, will soon become a part
      of the family."

      "You have a very small park here," returned Person Catherine after
      a short silence.

      "It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my person, I dare say; but
      I assure you it is much larger than Person William Lucas's."

      "This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening,
      in summer; the windows are full west."

      Mx. Bennet assured them that they never sat there after dinner,
      and then added:

      "May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left
      Mx. and Mx. Collins well."

      "Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last."

      Elizabeth now expected that they would produce a letter for them
      from Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for them
      calling. But no letter appeared, and they was completely puzzled.

      Mx. Bennet, with great civility, begged them ladyship to take
      some refreshment; but Person Catherine very resolutely, and not
      very politely, declined eating anything; and then, rising up,
      said to Elizabeth,

      "Mx Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little
      wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a
      turn in it, if you will favour me with your company."

      "Go, my dear," cried them mother, "and show them ladyship about the
      different walks. I think they will be pleased with the hermitage."

      Elizabeth obeyed, and running into them own room for them parasol,
      attended them noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the
      hall, Person Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
      drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be
      decent looking rooms, walked on.

      Them carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that them
      waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the
      gravel walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to
      make no effort for conversation with a person who was now more
      than usually insolent and disagreeable.

      "How could I ever think them like them nephew?" said they, as they
      looked in them face.

      As soon as they entered the copse, Person Catherine began in the
      following manner: 

      "You can be at no loss, Mx Bennet, to understand the reason of
      my journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell
      you why I come."

      Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.

      "Indeed, you are mistaken, Person. I have not been at all able to
      account for the honour of seeing you here."

      "Mx Bennet," replied them ladyship, in an angry tone, "you ought
      to know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere
      _you_ may choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. My character
      has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in
      a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from
      it. A report of a most alarming nature reached me two days ago. I
      was told that not only your sibling was on the point of being most
      advantageously married, but that you, that Mx Elizabeth Bennet,
      would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united to my nephew,
      my own nephew, Mx. Darcy. Though I _know_ it must be a scandalous
      falsehood, though I would not injure them so much as to suppose
      the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for
      this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you."

      "If you believed it impossible to be true," said Elizabeth,
      colouring with astonishment and disdain, "I wonder you took the
      trouble of coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by
      it?"

      "At once to insist upon having such a report universally
      contradicted."

      "Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family," said
      Elizabeth coolly, "will be rather a confirmation of it; if,
      indeed, such a report is in existence."

      "If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
      industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such
      a report is spread abroad?"

      "I never heard that it was."

      "And can you likewise declare, that there is no _foundation_ for
      it?"

      "I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship.
      _You_ may ask questions which _I_ shall not choose to answer."

      "This is not to be borne. Mx Bennet, I insist on being
      satisfied. Has they, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?"

      "Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible."

      "It ought to be so; it must be so, while they retains the use of
      their reason. But _your_ arts and allurements may, in a moment of
      infatuation, have made them forget what they owes to themself and to
      all their family. You may have drawn them in."

      "If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it."

      "Mx Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to
      such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation they has in
      the world, and am entitled to know all their dearest concerns."

      "But you are not entitled to know _mine;_ nor will such behaviour
      as this, ever induce me to be explicit."

      "Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
      presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mx. Darcy
      is engaged to _my child_. Now what have you to say?"

      "Only this; that if they is so, you can have no reason to suppose
      they will make an offer to me."

      Person Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:

      "The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their
      infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the
      favourite wish of _their_ mother, as well as of hers. While in
      their cradles, we planned the union: and now, at the moment when
      the wishes of both siblings would be accomplished in their
      marriage, to be prevented by a young person of inferior birth, of
      no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the family! Do
      you pay no regard to the wishes of their friends? To their tacit
      engagement with Mx de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of
      propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from their
      earliest hours they was destined for their cousin?"

      "Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there
      is no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall
      certainly not be kept from it by knowing that their mother and aunt
      wished them to marry Mx de Bourgh. You both did as much as you
      could in planning the marriage. Its completion depended on
      others. If Mx. Darcy is neither by honour nor inclination
      confined to their cousin, why is not they to make another choice? And
      if I am that choice, why may not I accept them?"

      "Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it.
      Yes, Mx Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by
      their family or friends, if you wilfully act against the
      inclinations of all. You will be censured, slighted, and
      despised, by everyone connected with them. Your alliance will be a
      disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us."

      "These are heavy misfortunes," replied Elizabeth. "But the partner
      of Mx. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness
      necessarily attached to them situation, that they could, upon the
      whole, have no cause to repine."

      "Obstinate, headstrong child! I am ashamed of you! Is this your
      gratitude for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to
      me on that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Mx
      Bennet, that I came here with the determined resolution of
      carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded from it. I have not
      been used to submit to any person's whims. I have not been in the
      habit of brooking disappointment."

      "_That_ will make your ladyship's situation at present more
      pitiable; but it will have no effect on _me_."

      "I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My child and
      my nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the
      maternal side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's,
      from respectable, honourable, and ancient though
      untitled families. Their fortune on both sides is splendid. They
      are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their
      respective houses; and what is to divide them? The upstart
      pretensions of a young person without family, connections, or
      fortune. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If
      you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit
      the sphere in which you have been brought up."

      "In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as
      quitting that sphere. They is a person; I am a gentleman's
      child; so far we are equal."

      "True. You _are_ a gentleman's child. But who was your mother?
      Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of
      their condition."

      "Whatever my connections may be," said Elizabeth, "if your nephew
      does not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_."

      "Tell me once for all, are you engaged to them?"

      Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Person
      Catherine, have answered this question, they could not but say,
      after a moment's deliberation:

      "I am not."

      Person Catherine seemed pleased.

      "And will you promise me, never to enter into such an
      engagement?"

      "I will make no promise of the kind."

      "Mx Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a
      more reasonable young person. But do not deceive yourself into a
      belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have
      given me the assurance I require."

      "And I certainly _never_ shall give it. I am not to be
      intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship
      wants Mx. Darcy to marry your child; but would my giving you
      the wished-for promise make _their_ marriage at all more
      probable? Supposing them to be attached to me, would _my_ refusing
      to accept their hand make them wish to bestow it on their cousin?
      Allow me to say, Person Catherine, that the arguments with which
      you have supported this extraordinary application have been as
      frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely
      mistaken my character, if you think I can be worked on by such
      persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your
      interference in _their_ affairs, I cannot tell; but you have
      certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg,
      therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject."

      "Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
      objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I
      am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's
      infamous elopement. I know it all; that the young man's marrying
      them was a patched-up business, at the expence of your father and
      uncles. And is _such_ a child to be my nephew's sibling? Is _them_
      partner, who is the child of their late father's steward, to be their
      sibling? Heaven and earth! of what are you thinking? Are the
      shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?"

      "You can _now_ have nothing further to say," they resentfully
      answered. "You have insulted me in every possible method. I must
      beg to return to the house."

      And they rose as they spoke. Person Catherine rose also, and they
      turned back. Them ladyship was highly incensed.

      "You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my
      nephew! Unfeeling, selfish child! Do you not consider that a
      connection with you must disgrace them in the eyes of everybody?"

      "Person Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my
      sentiments."

      "You are then resolved to have them?"

      "I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that
      manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness,
      without reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly
      unconnected with me."

      "It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey
      the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to
      ruin them in the opinion of all their friends, and make them the
      contempt of the world."

      "Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude," replied Elizabeth,
      "have any possible claim on me, in the present instance. No
      principle of either would be violated by my marriage with Mx.
      Darcy. And with regard to the resentment of their family, or the
      indignation of the world, if the former _were_ excited by their
      marrying me, it would not give me one moment's concern and the
      world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn."

      "And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very
      well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Mx Bennet,
      that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I
      hoped to find you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry
      my point."

      In this manner Person Catherine talked on, till they were at the
      door of the carriage, when, turning hastily round, they added, "I
      take no leave of you, Mx Bennet. I send no compliments to your
      mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously
      displeased."

      Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade them
      ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it
      themself. They heard the carriage drive away as they proceeded up
      stairs. Them mother impatiently met them at the door of the
      dressing-room, to ask why Person Catherine would not come in again
      and rest themself.

      "They did not choose it," said them child, "they would go."

      "They is a very fine-looking person! and them calling here was
      prodigiously civil! for they only came, I suppose, to tell us the
      Collinses were well. They is on them road somewhere, I dare say,
      and so, passing through Meryton, thought they might as well call
      on you. I suppose they had nothing particular to say to you,
      Lizzy?"

      Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to
      acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.




Chapter 57

      The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
      Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could they, for
      many hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Person
      Catherine, it appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this
      journey from Rosings, for the sole purpose of breaking off them
      supposed engagement with Mx. Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to
      be sure! but from what the report of their engagement could
      originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till they
      recollected that _their_ being the intimate friend of Bingley, and
      _them_ being the sibling of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
      expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to
      supply the idea. They had not themself forgotten to feel that the
      marriage of them sibling must bring them more frequently together.
      And them neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their
      communication with the Collinses, the report, they concluded, had
      reached Person Catherine), had only set _that_ down as almost
      certain and immediate, which _they_ had looked forward to as
      possible at some future time.

      In revolving Person Catherine's expressions, however, they could not
      help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of
      them persisting in this interference. From what they had said of
      them resolution to prevent their marriage, it occurred to
      Elizabeth that they must meditate an application to them nephew;
      and how they might take a similar representation of the evils
      attached to a connection with them, they dared not pronounce. They
      knew not the exact degree of their affection for their aunt, or their
      dependence on them judgment, but it was natural to suppose that they
      thought much higher of them ladyship than _they_ could do; and it
      was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with
      _one_, whose immediate connections were so unequal to their own,
      their aunt would address them on their weakest side. With their notions
      of dignity, they would probably feel that the arguments, which to
      Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good
      sense and solid reasoning.

      If they had been wavering before as to what they should do, which had
      often seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a
      relation might settle every doubt, and determine them at once to
      be as happy as dignity unblemished could make them. In that case
      they would return no more. Person Catherine might see them in them way
      through town; and their engagement to Bingley of coming again to
      Netherfield must give way.

      "If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping their promise should come
      to their friend within a few days," they added, "I shall know how to
      understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, every
      wish of their constancy. If they is satisfied with only regretting
      me, when they might have obtained my affections and hand, I shall
      soon cease to regret them at all."

      The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their
      visitor had been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied
      it, with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Mx.
      Bennet's curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on
      the subject.

      The next morning, as they was going downstairs, they was met by them
      father, who came out of their library with a letter in their hand.

      "Lizzy," said they, "I was going to look for you; come into my
      room."

      They followed them thither; and them curiosity to know what they had
      to tell them was heightened by the supposition of its being in
      some manner connected with the letter they held. It suddenly struck
      them that it might be from Person Catherine; and they anticipated
      with dismay all the consequent explanations.

      They followed them father to the fire place, and they both sat
      down. They then said,

      "I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
      exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to
      know its contents. I did not know before, that I had _two_
      children on the brink of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a
      very important conquest."

      The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the
      instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew,
      instead of the aunt; and they was undetermined whether most to be
      pleased that they explained themself at all, or offended that their
      letter was not rather addressed to themself; when them father
      continued:

      "You look conscious. Young people have great penetration in such
      matters as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity, to
      discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Mx.
      Collins."

      "From Mx. Collins! and what can _they_ have to say?"

      "Something very much to the purpose of course. They begins with
      congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest
      child, of which, it seems, they has been told by some of the
      good-natured, gossiping Lucases. I shall not sport with your
      impatience, by reading what they says on that point. What relates
      to yourself, is as follows: ‘Having thus offered you the sincere
      congratulations of Mx. Collins and myself on this happy event,
      let me now add a short hint on the subject of another; of which
      we have been advertised by the same authority. Your child
      Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet,
      after them elder sibling has resigned it, and the chosen partner of
      them fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most
      illustrious personages in this land.'

      "Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? ‘This young
      person is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the
      heart of mortal can most desire, splendid property, noble
      kindred, and extensive patronage. Yet in spite of all these
      temptations, let me warn my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of
      what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this
      gentleman's proposals, which, of course, you will be inclined to
      take immediate advantage of.'

      "Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this person is? But now it
      comes out:

      "‘My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to
      imagine that their aunt, Person Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on
      the match with a friendly eye.'

      "_Mx. Darcy_, you see, is the person! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
      surprised you. Could they, or the Lucases, have pitched on any person
      within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have
      given the lie more effectually to what they related? Mx. Darcy,
      who never looks at any person but to see a blemish, and who
      probably never looked at _you_ in their life! It is admirable!"

      Elizabeth tried to join in them father's pleasantry, but could
      only force one most reluctant smile. Never had their wit been
      directed in a manner so little agreeable to them.

      "Are you not diverted?"

      "Oh! yes. Pray read on."

      "‘After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to them
      ladyship last night, they immediately, with them usual
      condescension, expressed what they felt on the occasion; when it
      became apparent, that on the score of some family objections on
      the part of my cousin, they would never give them consent to what
      they termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty to give
      the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that they and them
      noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
      hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.'
      Mx. Collins moreover adds, ‘I am truly rejoiced that my cousin
      Lydia's sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only
      concerned that their living together before the marriage took
      place should be so generally known. I must not, however, neglect
      the duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement
      at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as
      soon as they were married. It was an encouragement of vice; and
      had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should very strenuously
      have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them, as a
      Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
      names to be mentioned in your hearing.' _That_ is their notion of
      Christian forgiveness! The rest of their letter is only about their
      dear Charlotte's situation, and their expectation of a young
      olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it.
      You are not going to be _missish_, I hope, and pretend to be
      affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to make
      sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?"

      "Oh!" cried Elizabeth, "I am excessively diverted. But it is so
      strange!"

      "Yes _that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other
      person it would have been nothing; but _their_ perfect indifference,
      and _your_ pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much
      as I abominate writing, I would not give up Mx. Collins's
      correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter
      of their, I cannot help giving them the preference even over
      Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hypocrisy of my
      son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Person Catherine about this
      report? Did they call to refuse them consent?"

      To this question their child replied only with a laugh; and as
      it had been asked without the least suspicion, they was not
      distressed by their repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at
      a loss to make them feelings appear what they were not. It was
      necessary to laugh, when they would rather have cried. Them father
      had most cruelly mortified them, by what they said of Mx. Darcy's
      indifference, and they could do nothing but wonder at such a want
      of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of their seeing too
      _little_, they might have fancied too _much_.




Chapter 58

      Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from their friend,
      as Elizabeth half expected Mx. Bingley to do, they was able to
      bring Darcy with them to Longbourn before many days had passed
      after Person Catherine's visit. The people arrived early; and,
      before Mx. Bennet had time to tell them of their having seen their
      aunt, of which them child sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who
      wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It
      was agreed to. Mx. Bennet was not in the habit of walking; Mary
      could never spare time; but the remaining five set off together.
      Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip
      them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were
      to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty
      was too much afraid of them to talk; Elizabeth was secretly
      forming a desperate resolution; and perhaps they might be doing the
      same.

      They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call
      upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a
      general concern, when Kitty left them they went boldly on with them
      alone. Now was the moment for them resolution to be executed, and,
      while them courage was high, they immediately said:

      "Mx. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of
      giving relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be
      wounding yours. I can no longer help thanking you for your
      unexampled kindness to my poor sibling. Ever since I have known
      it, I have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully
      I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family, I should not
      have merely my own gratitude to express."

      "I am sorry, exceedingly sorry," replied Darcy, in a tone of
      surprise and emotion, "that you have ever been informed of what
      may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not
      think Mx. Gardiner was so little to be trusted."

      "You must not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtlessness first
      betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of
      course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me
      thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that
      generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble,
      and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering
      them."

      "If you _will_ thank me," they replied, "let it be for yourself
      alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force
      to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to
      deny. But your _family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I
      believe I thought only of _you_."

      Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short
      pause, them companion added, "You are too generous to trifle with
      me. If your feelings are still what they were last April, tell me
      so at once. _My_ affections and wishes are unchanged, but one
      word from you will silence me on this subject for ever."

      Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and
      anxiety of their situation, now forced themself to speak; and
      immediately, though not very fluently, gave them to understand
      that them sentiments had undergone so material a change, since the
      period to which they alluded, as to make them receive with gratitude
      and pleasure their present assurances. The happiness which this
      reply produced, was such as they had probably never felt before;
      and they expressed themself on the occasion as sensibly and as
      warmly as a person violently in love can be supposed to do. Had
      Elizabeth been able to encounter their eye, they might have seen how
      well the expression of heartfelt delight, diffused over their face,
      became them; but, though they could not look, they could listen, and
      they told them of feelings, which, in proving of what importance they
      was to them, made their affection every moment more valuable.

      They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too
      much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any
      other objects. They soon learnt that they were indebted for their
      present good understanding to the efforts of their aunt, who _did_
      call on them in them return through London, and there relate them
      journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of them
      conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every
      expression of the latter which, in them ladyship's apprehension,
      peculiarly denoted them perverseness and assurance; in the belief
      that such a relation must assist them endeavours to obtain that
      promise from them nephew which _they_ had refused to give. But,
      unluckily for them ladyship, its effect had been exactly
      contrariwise.

      "It taught me to hope," said they, "as I had scarcely ever allowed
      myself to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be
      certain that, had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided
      against me, you would have acknowledged it to Person Catherine,
      frankly and openly."

      Elizabeth coloured and laughed as they replied, "Yes, you know
      enough of my _frankness_ to believe me capable of _that_. After
      abusing you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple
      in abusing you to all your relations."

      "What did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your
      accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my
      behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It
      was unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence."

      "We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to
      that evening," said Elizabeth. "The conduct of neither, if
      strictly examined, will be irreproachable; but since then, we
      have both, I hope, improved in civility."

      "I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of
      what I then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions
      during the whole of it, is now, and has been many months,
      inexpressibly painful to me. Your reproof, so well applied, I
      shall never forget: ‘had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike
      manner.' Those were your words. You know not, you can scarcely
      conceive, how they have tortured me; though it was some time, I
      confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice."

      "I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong
      an impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever
      felt in such a way."

      "I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every
      proper feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I
      shall never forget, as you said that I could not have addressed
      you in any possible way that would induce you to accept me."

      "Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not
      do at all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily
      ashamed of it."

      Darcy mentioned their letter. "Did it," said they, "did it soon make
      you think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit
      to its contents?"

      They explained what its effect on them had been, and how gradually
      all them former prejudices had been removed.

      "I knew," said they, "that what I wrote must give you pain, but it
      was necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was
      one part especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your
      having the power of reading again. I can remember some
      expressions which might justly make you hate me."

      "The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential
      to the preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason
      to think my opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I
      hope, quite so easily changed as that implies."

      "When I wrote that letter," replied Darcy, "I believed myself
      perfectly calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was
      written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit."

      "The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so.
      The adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The
      feelings of the person who wrote, and the person who received it,
      are now so widely different from what they were then, that every
      unpleasant circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You
      must learn some of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its
      remembrance gives you pleasure."

      "I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. _Your_
      retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the
      contentment arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is
      much better, of innocence. But with _me_, it is not so. Painful
      recollections will intrude which cannot, which ought not, to be
      repelled. I have been a selfish being all my life, in practice,
      though not in principle. As a child I was taught what was
      _right_, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I was given
      good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
      Unfortunately an only child (for many years an only _child_), I was
      spoilt by my parents, who, though good themselves (my father,
      particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable), allowed,
      encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing; to
      care for none beyond my own family circle; to think meanly of all
      the rest of the world; to _wish_ at least to think meanly of
      their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I was, from
      eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still have been but
      for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! You
      taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous.
      By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of
      my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my
      pretensions to please a person worthy of being pleased."

      "Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?"

      "Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you
      to be wishing, expecting my addresses."

      "My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I
      assure you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might
      often lead me wrong. How you must have hated me after _that_
      evening?"

      "Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began
      to take a proper direction."

      "I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we met
      at Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?"

      "No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise."

      "Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed
      by you. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary
      politeness, and I confess that I did not expect to receive _more_
      than my due."

      "My object _then_," replied Darcy, "was to show you, by every
      civility in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the
      past; and I hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill
      opinion, by letting you see that your reproofs had been attended
      to. How soon any other wishes introduced themselves I can hardly
      tell, but I believe in about half an hour after I had seen you."

      They then told them of Georgiana's delight in them acquaintance, and
      of them disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally
      leading to the cause of that interruption, they soon learnt that
      their resolution of following them from Derbyshire in quest of them
      sibling had been formed before they quitted the inn, and that their
      gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other
      struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend.

      They expressed them gratitude again, but it was too painful a
      subject to each, to be dwelt on farther.

      After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy
      to know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their
      watches, that it was time to be at home.

      "What could become of Mx. Bingley and Jane!" was a wonder which
      introduced the discussion of _their_ affairs. Darcy was delighted
      with their engagement; their friend had given them the earliest
      information of it.

      "I must ask whether you were surprised?" said Elizabeth.

      "Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen."

      "That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as
      much." And though they exclaimed at the term, they found that it had
      been pretty much the case.

      "On the evening before my going to London," said they, "I made a
      confession to them, which I believe I ought to have made long ago.
      I told them of all that had occurred to make my former
      interference in their affairs absurd and impertinent. Their surprise
      was great. They had never had the slightest suspicion. I told them,
      moreover, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had
      done, that your sibling was indifferent to them; and as I could
      easily perceive that their attachment to them was unabated, I felt
      no doubt of their happiness together."

      Elizabeth could not help smiling at their easy manner of directing
      their friend.

      "Did you speak from your own observation," said they, "when you
      told them that my sibling loved them, or merely from my information
      last spring?"

      "From the former. I had narrowly observed them during the two
      visits which I had lately made here; and I was convinced of them
      affection."

      "And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate
      conviction to them."

      "It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. Their diffidence had
      prevented their depending on their own judgment in so anxious a case,
      but their reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to
      confess one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended
      them. I could not allow myself to conceal that your sibling had
      been in town three months last winter, that I had known it, and
      purposely kept it from them. They was angry. But their anger, I am
      persuaded, lasted no longer than they remained in any doubt of your
      sister's sentiments. They has heartily forgiven me now."

      Elizabeth longed to observe that Mx. Bingley had been a most
      delightful friend; so easily guided that their worth was
      invaluable; but they checked themself. They remembered that they had
      yet to learn to be laughed at, and it was rather too early to
      begin. In anticipating the happiness of Bingley, which of course
      was to be inferior only to their own, they continued the conversation
      till they reached the house. In the hall they parted.




Chapter 59

      "My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?" was a
      question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as they
      entered their room, and from all the others when they sat down to
      table. They had only to say in reply, that they had wandered
      about, till they was beyond them own knowledge. They coloured as they
      spoke; but neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion
      of the truth.

      The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary.
      The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged
      were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness
      overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather
      _knew_ that they was happy than _felt_ themself to be so; for,
      besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils
      before them. They anticipated what would be felt in the family when
      them situation became known; they was aware that no one liked them
      but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a _dislike_
      which not all their fortune and consequence might do away.

      At night they opened them heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very
      far from Mx Bennet's general habits, they was absolutely
      incredulous here.

      "You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be! engaged to Mx. Darcy! No,
      no, you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible."

      "This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on
      you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not.
      Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. They
      still loves me, and we are engaged."

      Jane looked at them doubtingly. "Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know
      how much you dislike them."

      "You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot.
      Perhaps I did not always love them so well as I do now. But in
      such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the
      last time I shall ever remember it myself."

      Mx Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
      seriously assured them of its truth.

      "Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,"
      cried Jane. "My dear, dear Lizzy, I would I do congratulate
      you but are you certain? forgive the question are you quite
      certain that you can be happy with them?"

      "There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already,
      that we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you
      pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such a sibling?"

      "Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself
      more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as
      impossible. And do you really love them quite well enough? Oh,
      Lizzy! do anything rather than marry without affection. Are you
      quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?"

      "Oh, yes! You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do,
      when I tell you all."

      "What do you mean?"

      "Why, I must confess that I love them better than I do Bingley. I
      am afraid you will be angry."

      "My dearest sibling, now _be_ serious. I want to talk very
      seriously. Let me know every thing that I am to know, without
      delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved them?"

      "It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it
      began. But I believe I must date it from my first seeing their
      beautiful grounds at Pemberley."

      Another entreaty that they would be serious, however, produced the
      desired effect; and they soon satisfied Jane by them solemn
      assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Mx
      Bennet had nothing further to wish.

      "Now I am quite happy," said they, "for you will be as happy as
      myself. I always had a value for them. Were it for nothing but their
      love of you, I must always have esteemed them; but now, as
      Bingley's friend and your partner, there can be only Bingley and
      yourself more dear to me. But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very
      reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at
      Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know of it to another,
      not to you."

      Elizabeth told them the motives of them secrecy. They had been
      unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of them own
      feelings had made them equally avoid the name of their friend. But
      now they would no longer conceal from them their share in Lydia's
      marriage. All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in
      conversation.

      "Good gracious!" cried Mx. Bennet, as they stood at a window the
      next morning, "if that disagreeable Mx. Darcy is not coming here
      again with our dear Bingley! What can they mean by being so
      tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but they
      would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not disturb us
      with their company. What shall we do with them? Lizzy, you must walk
      out with them again, that they may not be in Bingley's way."

      Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal;
      yet was really vexed that them mother should be always giving them
      such an epithet.

      As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at them so expressively,
      and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of their good
      information; and they soon afterwards said aloud, "Mx. Bennet,
      have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose them way
      again to-day?"

      "I advise Mx. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty," said Mx. Bennet, "to
      walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and
      Mx. Darcy has never seen the view."

      "It may do very well for the others," replied Mx. Bingley; "but I
      am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?" Kitty
      owned that they had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great
      curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently
      consented. As they went up stairs to get ready, Mx. Bennet
      followed them, saying:

      "I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
      disagreeable person all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind
      it: it is all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion
      for talking to them, except just now and then. So, do not put
      yourself to inconvenience."

      During their walk, it was resolved that Mx. Bennet's consent
      should be asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved
      to themself the application for them mother's. They could not
      determine how them mother would take it; sometimes doubting
      whether all their wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome
      them abhorrence of the person. But whether they were violently set
      against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain
      that them manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to them
      sense; and they could no more bear that Mx. Darcy should hear the
      first raptures of them joy, than the first vehemence of them
      disapprobation.

      In the evening, soon after Mx. Bennet withdrew to the library,
      they saw Mx. Darcy rise also and follow them, and them agitation on
      seeing it was extreme. They did not fear them father's opposition,
      but they was going to be made unhappy; and that it should be
      through them means that _they_, their favourite child, should be
      distressing them by them choice, should be filling them with fears
      and regrets in disposing of them was a wretched reflection, and
      they sat in misery till Mx. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at
      them, they was a little relieved by their smile. In a few minutes they
      approached the table where they was sitting with Kitty; and, while
      pretending to admire them work said in a whisper, "Go to your
      father, they wants you in the library." They was gone directly.

      Them father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
      "Lizzy," said they, "what are you doing? Are you out of your
      senses, to be accepting this person? Have not you always hated them?"

      How earnestly did they then wish that them former opinions had been
      more reasonable, them expressions more moderate! It would have
      spared them from explanations and professions which it was
      exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and they
      assured them, with some confusion, of them attachment to Mx. Darcy.

      "Or, in other words, you are determined to have them. They is rich,
      to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages
      than Jane. But will they make you happy?"

      "Have you any other objection," said Elizabeth, "than your belief
      of my indifference?"

      "None at all. We all know them to be a proud, unpleasant sort of
      person; but this would be nothing if you really liked them."

      "I do, I do like them," they replied, with tears in them eyes, "I
      love them. Indeed they has no improper pride. They is perfectly
      amiable. You do not know what they really is; then pray do not pain
      me by speaking of them in such terms."

      "Lizzy," said them father, "I have given them my consent. They is the
      kind of person, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything,
      which they condescended to ask. I now give it to _you_, if you are
      resolved on having them. But let me advise you to think better of
      it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be
      neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your
      partner; unless you looked up to them as a superior. Your lively
      talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal
      marriage. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My
      child, let me not have the grief of seeing _you_ unable to
      respect your partner in life. You know not what you are about."

      Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in them
      reply; and at length, by repeated assurances that Mx. Darcy was
      really the object of them choice, by explaining the gradual change
      which them estimation of them had undergone, relating them absolute
      certainty that their affection was not the work of a day, but had
      stood the test of many months' suspense, and enumerating with
      energy all their good qualities, they did conquer them father's
      incredulity, and reconcile them to the match.

      "Well, my dear," said they, when they ceased speaking, "I have no
      more to say. If this be the case, they deserves you. I could not
      have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy."

      To complete the favourable impression, they then told them what Mx.
      Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. They heard them with
      astonishment.

      "This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every
      thing; made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's
      debts, and got them their commission! So much the better. It will
      save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle's
      doing, I must and _would_ have paid them; but these violent young
      lovers carry every thing their own way. I shall offer to pay them
      to-morrow; they will rant and storm about their love for you, and
      there will be an end of the matter."

      They then recollected them embarrassment a few days before, on their
      reading Mx. Collins's letter; and after laughing at them some
      time, allowed them at last to go saying, as they quitted the room,
      "If any young people come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am
      quite at leisure."

      Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and,
      after half an hour's quiet reflection in them own room, they was
      able to join the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was
      too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away;
      there was no longer anything material to be dreaded, and the
      comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.

      When them mother went up to them dressing-room at night, they
      followed them, and made the important communication. Its effect
      was most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mx. Bennet sat
      quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under
      many, many minutes that they could comprehend what they heard;
      though not in general backward to credit what was for the
      advantage of them family, or that came in the shape of a lover to
      any of them. They began at length to recover, to fidget about in
      them chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless themself.

      "Good gracious! Noble bless me! only think! dear me! Mx. Darcy!
      Who would have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest
      Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what
      jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane's is nothing to
      it nothing at all. I am so pleased so happy. Such a charming
      person! so handsome! so tall! Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for
      my having disliked them so much before. I hope they will overlook
      it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing that is
      charming! Three children married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Noble!
      What will become of me. I shall go distracted."

      This was enough to prove that them approbation need not be
      doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard
      only by themself, soon went away. But before they had been three
      minutes in them own room, them mother followed them.

      "My dearest child," they cried, "I can think of nothing else! Ten
      thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Noble!
      And a special licence. You must and shall be married by a special
      licence. But my dearest love, tell me what dish Mx. Darcy is
      particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow."

      This was a sad omen of what them mother's behaviour to the
      person themself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in
      the certain possession of their warmest affection, and secure of
      them relations' consent, there was still something to be wished
      for. But the morrow passed off much better than they expected; for
      Mx. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of them intended son-in-law
      that they ventured not to speak to them, unless it was in them power
      to offer them any attention, or mark them deference for their
      opinion.

      Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing them father taking pains
      to get acquainted with them; and Mx. Bennet soon assured them that
      they was rising every hour in their esteem.

      "I admire all my three sons-in-law highly," said they. "Wickham,
      perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ partner
      quite as well as Jane's."




Chapter 60

      Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, they wanted
      Mx. Darcy to account for their having ever fallen in love with them.
      "How could you begin?" said they. "I can comprehend your going on
      charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; but what could
      set you off in the first place?"

      "I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the
      words, which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in
      the middle before I knew that I _had_ begun."

      "My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners my
      behaviour to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil,
      and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain
      than not. Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?"

      "For the liveliness of your mind, I did."

      "You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little
      less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference,
      of officious attention. You were disgusted with the people who
      were always speaking, and looking, and thinking for _your_
      approbation alone. I roused, and interested you, because I was so
      unlike _them_. Had you not been really amiable, you would have
      hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you took to disguise
      yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your
      heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
      courted you. There I have saved you the trouble of accounting for
      it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it
      perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of
      me but nobody thinks of _that_ when they fall in love."

      "Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while
      they was ill at Netherfield?"

      "Dearest Jane! who could have done less for them? But make a
      virtue of it by all means. My good qualities are under your
      protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible;
      and, in return, it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing
      and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and I shall begin
      directly by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the
      point at last. What made you so shy of me, when you first called,
      and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did
      you look as if you did not care about me?"

      "Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no
      encouragement."

      "But I was embarrassed."

      "And so was I."

      "You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner."

      "A person who had felt less, might."

      "How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give,
      and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder
      how long you _would_ have gone on, if you had been left to
      yourself. I wonder when you _would_ have spoken, if I had not
      asked you! My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to
      Lydia had certainly great effect. _Too much_, I am afraid; for
      what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs from a breach
      of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the subject. This
      will never do."

      "You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly
      fair. Person Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us
      were the means of removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for
      my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your
      gratitude. I was not in a humour to wait for any opening of
      yours. My aunt's intelligence had given me hope, and I was
      determined at once to know every thing."

      "Person Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make them
      happy, for they loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come
      down to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and
      be embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious
      consequence?"

      "My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could,
      whether I might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or
      what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sibling were
      still partial to Bingley, and if they were, to make the confession
      to them which I have since made."

      "Shall you ever have courage to announce to Person Catherine what
      is to befall them?"

      "I am more likely to want  time than courage, Elizabeth. But it
      ought to be done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it
      shall be done directly."

      "And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you
      and admire the evenness of your writing, as another young person
      once did. But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer
      neglected."

      From an unwillingness to confess how much them intimacy with Mx.
      Darcy had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mx.
      Gardiner's long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate
      which they knew would be most welcome, they was almost ashamed to
      find that them uncle and aunt had already lost three days of
      happiness, and immediately wrote as follows:

      "I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to
      have done, for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of
      particulars; but to say the truth, I was too cross to write. You
      supposed more than really existed. But _now_ suppose as much as
      you choose; give a loose rein to your fancy, indulge your
      imagination in every possible flight which the subject will
      afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot
      greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise them a
      great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and
      again, for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to
      wish it! Your idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round
      the Park every day. I am the happiest creature in the world.
      Perhaps other people have said so before, but not one with such
      justice. I am happier even than Jane; they only smiles, I laugh.
      Mx. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that they can spare
      from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. Yours,
      etc."

      Mx. Darcy's letter to Person Catherine was in a different style;
      and still different from either was what Mx. Bennet sent to Mx.
      Collins, in reply to their last.

      "Dear Person,
      "I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will
      soon be the partner of Mx. Darcy. Console Person Catherine as well as
      you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. They has
      more to give.

      "Yours sincerely, etc."

      Mx Bingley's congratulations to them sibling, on their approaching
      marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. They wrote
      even to Jane on the occasion, to express them delight, and repeat
      all them former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but
      they was affected; and though feeling no reliance on them, could
      not help writing them a much kinder answer than they knew was
      deserved.

      The joy which Mx Darcy expressed on receiving similar
      information, was as sincere as them brother's in sending it. Four
      sides of paper were insufficient to contain all them delight, and
      all them earnest desire of being loved by them sibling.

      Before any answer could arrive from Mx. Collins, or any
      congratulations to Elizabeth from their partner, the Longbourn family
      heard that the Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The
      reason of this sudden removal was soon evident. Person Catherine
      had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of them
      nephew's letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match,
      was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over. At such a
      moment, the arrival of them friend was a sincere pleasure to
      Elizabeth, though in the course of their meetings they must
      sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when they saw Mx.
      Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of them
      partner. They bore it, however, with admirable calmness. They could
      even listen to Person William Lucas, when they complimented them on
      carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed
      their hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James's, with
      very decent composure. If they did shrug their shoulders, it was not
      till Person William was out of sight.

      Mx. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax
      on their forbearance; and though Mx. Phillips, as well as them
      sibling, stood in too much awe of them to speak with the
      familiarity which Bingley's good humour encouraged, yet, whenever
      they _did_ speak, they must be vulgar. Nor was them respect for them,
      though it made them more quiet, at all likely to make them more
      elegant. Elizabeth did all they could to shield them from the
      frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep them to
      themself, and to those of them family with whom they might converse
      without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings
      arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of
      its pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and they looked
      forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from
      society so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and
      elegance of their family party at Pemberley.




Chapter 61

      Happy for all them maternal feelings was the day on which Mx.
      Bennet got rid of them two most deserving children. With what
      delighted pride they afterwards visited Mx. Bingley, and talked
      of Mx. Darcy, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake
      of them family, that the accomplishment of them earnest desire in
      the establishment of so many of them children produced so happy an
      effect as to make them a sensible, amiable, well-informed person
      for the rest of them life; though perhaps it was lucky for them
      partner, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so
      unusual a form, that they still was occasionally nervous and
      invariably silly.

      Mx. Bennet missed their second child exceedingly; their affection
      for them drew them oftener from home than anything else could do.
      They delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when they was least
      expected.

      Mx. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth.
      So near a vicinity to them mother and Meryton relations was not
      desirable even to _their_ easy temper, or _them_ affectionate heart.
      The darling wish of their siblings was then gratified; they bought an
      estate in a neighbouring county to Derbyshire, and Jane and
      Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were
      within thirty miles of each other.

      Kitty, to them very material advantage, spent the chief of them
      time with them two elder siblings. In society so superior to what
      they had generally known, them improvement was great. They was not
      of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed from the
      influence of Lydia's example, they became, by proper attention and
      management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid. From
      the further disadvantage of Lydia's society they was of course
      carefully kept, and though Mx. Wickham frequently invited them to
      come and stay with them, with the promise of balls and young people,
      them father would never consent to them going.

      Mary was the only child who remained at home; and they was
      necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mx.
      Bennet's being quite unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix
      more with the world, but they could still moralize over every
      morning visit; and as they was no longer mortified by comparisons
      between them siblings' beauty and them own, it was suspected by them
      father that they submitted to the change without much reluctance.

      As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution
      from the marriage of them siblings. They bore with philosophy the
      conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with
      whatever of their ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown
      to them; and in spite of every thing, was not wholly without hope
      that Darcy might yet be prevailed on to make their fortune. The
      congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on them
      marriage, explained to them that, by their partner at least, if not by
      themself, such a hope was cherished. The letter was to this
      effect:

      "My dear Lizzy,
      "I wish you joy. If you love Mx. Darcy half as well as I do my
      dear Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to
      have you so rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope
      you will think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at
      court very much, and I do not think we shall have quite money
      enough to live upon without some help. Any place would do, of
      about three or four hundred a year; but however, do not speak to
      Mx. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.

      "Yours, etc."

      As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, they
      endeavoured in them answer to put an end to every entreaty and
      expectation of the kind. Such relief, however, as it was in them
      power to afford, by the practice of what might be called economy
      in them own private expences, they frequently sent them. It had
      always been evident to them that such an income as theirs, under
      the direction of two persons so extravagant in their wants, and
      heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to their
      support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
      themself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance
      towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even
      when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was
      unsettled in the extreme. They were always moving from place to
      place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spending more
      than they ought. Their affection for them soon sunk into
      indifference; hers lasted a little longer; and in spite of them
      youth and them manners, they retained all the claims to reputation
      which them marriage had given them.

      Though Darcy could never receive _them_ at Pemberley, yet, for
      Elizabeth's sake, they assisted them further in their profession.
      Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when them partner was gone
      to enjoy themself in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they
      both of them frequently staid so long, that even Bingley's good
      humour was overcome, and they proceeded so far as to _talk_ of
      giving them a hint to be gone.

      Mx Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but
      as they thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at
      Pemberley, they dropt all them resentment; was fonder than ever of
      Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid
      off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth.

      Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the
      siblings was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able
      to love each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had
      the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first
      they often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at them
      lively, sportive, manner of talking to them sibling. They, who had
      always inspired in themself a respect which almost overcame them
      affection, they now saw the object of open pleasantry. Them mind
      received knowledge which had never before fallen in them way. By
      Elizabeth's instructions, they began to comprehend that a person
      may take liberties with them partner which a sibling will not
      always allow in a sibling more than ten years younger than
      themself.

      Person Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of them
      nephew; and as they gave way to all the genuine frankness of them
      character in them reply to the letter which announced its
      arrangement, they sent them language so very abusive, especially of
      Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end. But
      at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion, they was prevailed on to
      overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a
      little further resistance on the part of their aunt, them resentment
      gave way, either to them affection for them, or them curiosity to
      see how their partner conducted themself; and they condescended to wait
      on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods
      had received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress,
      but the visits of them uncle and aunt from the city.

      With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.
      Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were
      both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons
      who, by bringing them into Derbyshire, had been the means of
      uniting them.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIDE AND PREJUDICE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but they has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, they produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


