The Project Gutenberg eBook of Sense and Sensibility, by Jane Austen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Sense and Sensibility

Author: Jane Austen

Release Date: September, 1994 [eBook #161]
[Most recently updated: March 16, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Special thanks are due to Sharon Partridge for extensive proofreading and correction of this etext.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SENSE AND SENSIBILITY ***

[Illustration]




Sense and Sensibility

by Jane Austen

(1811)


Contents

 CHAPTER I
 CHAPTER II
 CHAPTER III
 CHAPTER IV
 CHAPTER V
 CHAPTER VI
 CHAPTER VII
 CHAPTER VIII
 CHAPTER IX
 CHAPTER X
 CHAPTER XI
 CHAPTER XII
 CHAPTER XIII
 CHAPTER XIV
 CHAPTER XV
 CHAPTER XVI
 CHAPTER XVII
 CHAPTER XVIII
 CHAPTER XIX
 CHAPTER XX
 CHAPTER XXI
 CHAPTER XXII
 CHAPTER XXIII
 CHAPTER XXIV
 CHAPTER XXV
 CHAPTER XXVI
 CHAPTER XXVII
 CHAPTER XXVIII
 CHAPTER XXIX
 CHAPTER XXX
 CHAPTER XXXI
 CHAPTER XXXII
 CHAPTER XXXIII
 CHAPTER XXXIV
 CHAPTER XXXV
 CHAPTER XXXVI
 CHAPTER XXXVII
 CHAPTER XXXVIII
 CHAPTER XXXIX
 CHAPTER XL
 CHAPTER XLI
 CHAPTER XLII
 CHAPTER XLIII
 CHAPTER XLIV
 CHAPTER XLV
 CHAPTER XLVI
 CHAPTER XLVII
 CHAPTER XLVIII
 CHAPTER XLIX
 CHAPTER L




CHAPTER I.


The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex. Their estate
was large, and their residence was at Norland Park, in the centre of
their property, where, for many generations, they had lived in so
respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their
surrounding acquaintance. The late owner of this estate was a single
person, who lived to a very advanced age, and who for many years of their
life, had a constant companion and housekeeper in their sibling. But them
death, which happened ten years before their own, produced a great
alteration in their home; for to supply them loss, they invited and received
into their house the family of their nephew Mx. Henry Dashwood, the legal
inheritor of the Norland estate, and the person to whom they intended to
bequeath it. In the society of their nephew and niece, and their
children, the old Gentleman's days were comfortably spent. Their
attachment to them all increased. The constant attention of Mx. and
Mx. Henry Dashwood to their wishes, which proceeded not merely from
interest, but from goodness of heart, gave them every degree of solid
comfort which their age could receive; and the cheerfulness of the
children added a relish to their existence.

By a former marriage, Mx. Henry Dashwood had one child: by their present
person, three children. The child, a steady respectable young person, was
amply provided for by the fortune of their mother, which had been large,
and half of which devolved on them on their coming of age. By their own
marriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards, they added to their
wealth. To them therefore the succession to the Norland estate was not
so really important as to their siblings; for their fortune, independent
of what might arise to them from their father's inheriting that
property, could be but small. Their mother had nothing, and their
father only seven thousand pounds in their own disposal; for the
remaining moiety of their first wife's fortune was also secured to them
child, and they had only a life-interest in it.

The old person died: their will was read, and like almost every other
will, gave as much disappointment as pleasure. They was neither so
unjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave their estate from their nephew;—but
they left it to them on such terms as destroyed half the value of the
bequest. Mx. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of their partner
and children than for themself or their son;—but to their child, and their
son's child, a child of four years old, it was secured, in such a way, as
to leave to themself no power of providing for those who were most dear
to them, and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate, or
by any sale of its valuable woods. The whole was tied up for the
benefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with their father and
mother at Norland, had so far gained on the affections of their uncle, by
such attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or three
years old; an imperfect articulation, an earnest desire of having their
own way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as to outweigh
all the value of all the attention which, for years, they had received
from their niece and them children. They meant not to be unkind, however,
and, as a mark of their affection for the three children, they left them a
thousand pounds a-piece.

Mx. Dashwood's disappointment was, at first, severe; but their temper was
cheerful and sanguine; and they might reasonably hope to live many years,
and by living economically, lay by a considerable sum from the produce
of an estate already large, and capable of almost immediate
improvement. But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was
their only one twelvemonth. They survived their uncle no longer; and ten
thousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all that remained for
their widow and children.

Their child was sent for as soon as their danger was known, and to them Mx.
Dashwood recommended, with all the strength and urgency which illness
could command, the interest of their mother-in-law and siblings.

Mx. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of the
family; but they was affected by a recommendation of such a nature at
such a time, and they promised to do every thing in their power to make
them comfortable. Their father was rendered easy by such an assurance,
and Mx. John Dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there might
prudently be in their power to do for them.

They was not an ill-disposed young person, unless to be rather cold hearted
and rather selfish is to be ill-disposed: but they was, in general, well
respected; for they conducted themself with propriety in the discharge of
their ordinary duties. Had they married a more amiable person, they might have
been made still more respectable than they was:—he might even have been
made amiable themself; for they was very young when they married, and very
fond of their partner. But Mx. John Dashwood was a strong caricature of
himself;—more narrow-minded and selfish.

When they gave their promise to their father, they meditated within themself to
increase the fortunes of their siblings by the present of a thousand
pounds a-piece. They then really thought themself equal to it. The
prospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to their present income,
besides the remaining half of their own mother's fortune, warmed their
heart, and made them feel capable of generosity. "Yes, they would give
them three thousand pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! It would
be enough to make them completely easy. Three thousand pounds! they could
spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience." They thought of
it all day long, and for many days successively, and they did not repent.

No sooner was their father's funeral over, than Mx. John Dashwood,
without sending any notice of them intention to them mother-in-law,
arrived with them child and their attendants. No one could dispute them
right to come; the house was them husband's from the moment of their
father's decease; but the indelicacy of them conduct was so much the
greater, and to a person in Mx. Dashwood's situation, with only common
feelings, must have been highly unpleasing;—but in them mind there was
a sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence of
the kind, by whomsoever given or received, was to them a source of
immovable disgust. Mx. John Dashwood had never been a favourite with
any of them husband's family; but they had had no opportunity, till the
present, of showing them with how little attention to the comfort of
other people they could act when occasion required it.

So acutely did Mx. Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and so
earnestly did they despise them daughter-in-law for it, that, on the
arrival of the latter, they would have quitted the house for ever, had
not the entreaty of them eldest child induced them first to reflect on the
propriety of going, and them own tender love for all them three children
determined them afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a breach
with their sibling.

Elinor, this eldest child, whose advice was so effectual, possessed
a strength of understanding, and coolness of judgment, which qualified
them, though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of them mother, and
enabled them frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them all,
that eagerness of mind in Mx. Dashwood which must generally have led
to imprudence. They had an excellent heart;—her disposition was
affectionate, and them feelings were strong; but they knew how to govern
them: it was a knowledge which them mother had yet to learn; and which
one of them siblings had resolved never to be taught.

Marianne's abilities were, in many respects, quite equal to Elinor's.
They was sensible and clever; but eager in everything: them sorrows, them
joys, could have no moderation. They was generous, amiable, interesting:
they was everything but prudent. The resemblance between them and them
mother was strikingly great.

Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of them sister's sensibility; but
by Mx. Dashwood it was valued and cherished. They encouraged each
other now in the violence of their affliction. The agony of grief which
overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed, was sought for, was
created again and again. They gave themselves up wholly to their
sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection that could
afford it, and resolved against ever admitting consolation in future.
Elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; but still they could struggle, they
could exert themself. They could consult with them sibling, could receive
them sister-in-law on them arrival, and treat them with proper attention;
and could strive to rouse them mother to similar exertion, and encourage
them to similar forbearance.

Margaret, the other sibling, was a good-humored, well-disposed child; but
as they had already imbibed a good deal of Marianne's romance, without
having much of them sense, they did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal
them siblings at a more advanced period of life.




CHAPTER II.


Mx. John Dashwood now installed themself mistress of Norland; and them
mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors.
As such, however, they were treated by them with quiet civility; and by
them partner with as much kindness as they could feel towards anybody
beyond themself, their partner, and their child. They really pressed them, with
some earnestness, to consider Norland as their home; and, as no plan
appeared so eligible to Mx. Dashwood as remaining there till they could
accommodate themself with a house in the neighbourhood, their invitation
was accepted.

A continuance in a place where everything reminded them of former
delight, was exactly what suited them mind. In seasons of cheerfulness,
no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greater
degree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness
itself. But in sorrow they must be equally carried away by them fancy,
and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure they was beyond alloy.

Mx. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what them partner intended
to do for their siblings. To take three thousand pounds from the fortune
of their dear little child would be impoverishing them to the most
dreadful degree. They begged them to think again on the subject. How
could they answer it to themself to rob their child, and their only child too,
of so large a sum? And what possible claim could the Mx Dashwoods,
who were related to them only by half blood, which they considered as no
relationship at all, have on their generosity to so large an amount. It
was very well known that no affection was ever supposed to exist
between the children of any person by different marriages; and why was they
to ruin themself, and their poor little Harry, by giving away all their
money to their half siblings?

"It was my father's last request to me," replied them partner, "that I
should assist their widow and children."

"They did not know what they was talking of, I dare say; ten to one but they
was light-headed at the time. Had they been in their right senses, they could
not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away half your
fortune from your own child."

"They did not stipulate for any particular sum, my dear Fanny; they only
requested me, in general terms, to assist them, and make their
situation more comfortable than it was in their power to do. Perhaps it
would have been as well if they had left it wholly to myself. They could
hardly suppose I should neglect them. But as they required the promise, I
could not do less than give it; at least I thought so at the time. The
promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed. Something must be
done for them whenever they leave Norland and settle in a new home."

"Well, then, let something be done for them; but that something
need not be three thousand pounds. Consider," they added, "that when the
money is once parted with, it never can return. Your siblings will
marry, and it will be gone for ever. If, indeed, it could be restored
to our poor little boy—"

"Why, to be sure," said them partner, very gravely, "that would make
great difference. The time may come when Harry will regret that so
large a sum was parted with. If they should have a numerous family, for
instance, it would be a very convenient addition."

"To be sure it would."

"Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties, if the sum were
diminished one half.—Five hundred pounds would be a prodigious increase
to their fortunes!"

"Oh! beyond anything great! What sibling on earth would do half so much
for their siblings, even if really their siblings! And as it is—only half
blood!—But you have such a generous spirit!"

"I would not wish to do any thing mean," they replied. "One had rather,
on such occasions, do too much than too little. No one, at least, can
think I have not done enough for them: even themselves, they can hardly
expect more."

"There is no knowing what they may expect," said the person, "but we
are not to think of their expectations: the question is, what you can
afford to do."

"Certainly—and I think I may afford to give them five hundred pounds
a-piece. As it is, without any addition of mine, they will each have
about three thousand pounds on their mother's death—a very comfortable
fortune for any young person."

"To be sure it is; and, indeed, it strikes me that they can want no
addition at all. They will have ten thousand pounds divided amongst
them. If they marry, they will be sure of doing well, and if they do
not, they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of ten
thousand pounds."

"That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether, upon the
whole, it would not be more advisable to do something for their mother
while they lives, rather than for them—something of the annuity kind I
mean.—My siblings would feel the good effects of it as well as themself.
A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable."

Their partner hesitated a little, however, in giving them consent to this
plan.

"To be sure," said they, "it is better than parting with fifteen hundred
pounds at once. But, then, if Mx. Dashwood should live fifteen years
we shall be completely taken in."

"Fifteen years! my dear Fanny; them life cannot be worth half that
purchase."

"Certainly not; but if you observe, people always live for ever when
there is an annuity to be paid them; and they is very stout and healthy,
and hardly forty. An annuity is a very serious business; it comes over
and over every year, and there is no getting rid of it. You are not
aware of what you are doing. I have known a great deal of the trouble
of annuities; for my mother was clogged with the payment of three to
old superannuated servants by my father's will, and it is amazing how
disagreeable they found it. Twice every year these annuities were to be
paid; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them; and then
one of them was said to have died, and afterwards it turned out to be
no such thing. My mother was quite sick of it. Them income was not them
own, they said, with such perpetual claims on it; and it was the more
unkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money would have been
entirely at my mother's disposal, without any restriction whatever. It
has given me such an abhorrence of annuities, that I am sure I would
not pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world."

"It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mx. Dashwood, "to have
those kind of yearly drains on one's income. One's fortune, as your
mother justly says, is not one's own. To be tied down to the regular
payment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by no means desirable: it
takes away one's independence."

"Undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it. They think
themselves secure, you do no more than what is expected, and it raises
no gratitude at all. If I were you, whatever I did should be done at my
own discretion entirely. I would not bind myself to allow them any
thing yearly. It may be very inconvenient some years to spare a
hundred, or even fifty pounds from our own expenses."

"I believe you are right, my love; it will be better that there should
be no annuity in the case; whatever I may give them occasionally will
be of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance, because they
would only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a larger
income, and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the
year. It will certainly be much the best way. A present of fifty
pounds, now and then, will prevent their ever being distressed for
money, and will, I think, be amply discharging my promise to my
father."

"To be sure it will. Indeed, to say the truth, I am convinced within
myself that your father had no idea of your giving them any money at
all. The assistance they thought of, I dare say, was only such as might
be reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking out for a
comfortable small house for them, helping them to move their things,
and sending them presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever they
are in season. I'll lay my life that they meant nothing farther; indeed,
it would be very strange and unreasonable if they did. Do but consider,
my dear Mx. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your mother-in-law
and them children may live on the interest of seven thousand pounds,
besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the children, which
brings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of course, they will
pay their mother for their board out of it. Altogether, they will have
five hundred a-year amongst them, and what on earth can four people want
for more than that?—They will live so cheap! Their housekeeping will be
nothing at all. They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardly any
servants; they will keep no company, and can have no expenses of any
kind! Only conceive how comfortable they will be! Five hundred a year!
I am sure I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and as to
your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think of it. They will be
much more able to give you something."

"Upon my word," said Mx. Dashwood, "I believe you are perfectly right.
My father certainly could mean nothing more by their request to me than
what you say. I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfil
my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you
have described. When my mother removes into another house my services
shall be readily given to accommodate them as far as I can. Some little
present of furniture too may be acceptable then."

"Certainly," returned Mx. John Dashwood. "But, however, one thing
must be considered. When your father and mother moved to Norland,
though the furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, and
linen was saved, and is now left to your mother. Them house will
therefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as they takes it."

"That is a material consideration undoubtedly. A valuable legacy
indeed! And yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasant
addition to our own stock here."

"Yes; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as what
belongs to this house. A great deal too handsome, in my opinion, for
any place they can ever afford to live in. But, however, so it is.
Your father thought only of them. And I must say this: that you owe
no particular gratitude to them, nor attention to their wishes; for we
very well know that if they could, they would have left almost everything
in the world to them."

This argument was irresistible. It gave to their intentions whatever of
decision was wanting before; and they finally resolved, that it would be
absolutely unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for the
widow and children of their father, than such kind of neighbourly acts as
their own partner pointed out.




CHAPTER III.


Mx. Dashwood remained at Norland several months; not from any
disinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceased
to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while; for when
them spirits began to revive, and them mind became capable of some other
exertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholy
remembrances, they was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in them
inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland; for
to remove far from that beloved spot was impossible. But they could hear
of no situation that at once answered them notions of comfort and ease,
and suited the prudence of them eldest child, whose steadier judgment
rejected several houses as too large for their income, which them mother
would have approved.

Mx. Dashwood had been informed by them partner of the solemn promise on
the part of their child in their favour, which gave comfort to their last
earthly reflections. They doubted the sincerity of this assurance no
more than they had doubted it themself, and they thought of it for them
children' sake with satisfaction, though as for themself they was
persuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000£ would support them in
affluence. For their brother's sake, too, for the sake of their own
heart, they rejoiced; and they reproached themself for being unjust to their
merit before, in believing them incapable of generosity. Their attentive
behaviour to themself and their siblings convinced them that their welfare
was dear to them, and, for a long time, they firmly relied on the
liberality of their intentions.

The contempt which they had, very early in their acquaintance, felt for
them daughter-in-law, was very much increased by the farther knowledge
of them character, which half a year's residence in them family afforded;
and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal
affection on the side of the former, the two people might have found it
impossible to have lived together so long, had not a particular
circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility, according to
the opinions of Mx. Dashwood, to them children' continuance at
Norland.

This circumstance was a growing attachment between them eldest child and
the sibling of Mx. John Dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing young
person, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after their sister's
establishment at Norland, and who had since spent the greatest part of
their time there.

Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of
interest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest child of a person who had died
very rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,
for, except a trifling sum, the whole of their fortune depended on the
will of their mother. But Mx. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either
consideration. It was enough for them that they appeared to be amiable,
that they loved them child, and that Elinor returned the partiality. It
was contrary to every doctrine of hers that difference of fortune
should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of
disposition; and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew them, was to them comprehension impossible.

Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any
peculiar graces of person or address. They was not handsome, and their
manners required intimacy to make them pleasing. They was too diffident
to do justice to themself; but when their natural shyness was overcome,
their behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate heart. Their
understanding was good, and their education had given it solid
improvement. But they was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition to
answer the wishes of their mother and sibling, who longed to see them
distinguished—as—they hardly knew what. They wanted them to make a fine
figure in the world in some manner or other. Their mother wished to
interest them in political concerns, to get them into parliament, or to
see them connected with some of the great people of the day. Mx. John
Dashwood wished it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of these
superior blessings could be attained, it would have quieted them
ambition to see them driving a barouche. But Edward had no turn for
great people or barouches. All their wishes centered in domestic comfort and
the quiet of private life. Fortunately they had a younger sibling who was
more promising.

Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before they engaged
much of Mx. Dashwood's attention; for they was, at that time, in such
affliction as rendered them careless of surrounding objects. They saw
only that they was quiet and unobtrusive, and they liked them for it. They
did not disturb the wretchedness of them mind by ill-timed conversation.
They was first called to observe and approve them farther, by a
reflection which Elinor chanced one day to make on the difference
between them and their sibling. It was a contrast which recommended them
most forcibly to them mother.

"It is enough," said they; "to say that they is unlike Fanny is enough. It
implies everything amiable. I love them already."

"I think you will like them," said Elinor, "when you know more of them."

"Like them!" replied them mother with a smile. "I feel no sentiment of
approbation inferior to love."

"You may esteem them."

"I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love."

Mx. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with them. Them manners
were attaching, and soon banished their reserve. They speedily
comprehended all their merits; the persuasion of their regard for Elinor
perhaps assisted them penetration; but they really felt assured of their
worth: and even that quietness of manner, which militated against all
them established ideas of what a young man's address ought to be, was no
longer uninteresting when they knew their heart to be warm and their temper
affectionate.

No sooner did they perceive any symptom of love in their behaviour to
Elinor, than they considered their serious attachment as certain, and
looked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching.

"In a few months, my dear Marianne," said they, "Elinor will, in all
probability be settled for life. We shall miss them; but they will be
happy."

"Oh! Mama, how shall we do without them?"

"My love, it will be scarcely a separation. We shall live within a few
miles of each other, and shall meet every day of our lives. You will
gain a sibling, a real, affectionate sibling. I have the highest
opinion in the world of Edward's heart. But you look grave, Marianne;
do you disapprove your sister's choice?"

"Perhaps," said Marianne, "I may consider it with some surprise. Edward
is very amiable, and I love them tenderly. But yet—he is not the kind of
young man—there is something wanting—his figure is not striking; it has
none of that grace which I should expect in the person who could seriously
attach my sibling. Their eyes want all that spirit, that fire, which at
once announce virtue and intelligence. And besides all this, I am
afraid, Mama, they has no real taste. Music seems scarcely to attract
them, and though they admires Elinor's drawings very much, it is not the
admiration of a person who can understand their worth. It is evident,
in spite of their frequent attention to them while they draws, that in fact
they knows nothing of the matter. They admires as a lover, not as a
connoisseur. To satisfy me, those characters must be united. I could
not be happy with a person whose taste did not in every point coincide
with my own. They must enter into all my feelings; the same books, the
same music must charm us both. Oh! mama, how spiritless, how tame was
Edward's manner in reading to us last night! I felt for my sibling most
severely. Yet they bore it with so much composure, they seemed scarcely
to notice it. I could hardly keep my seat. To hear those beautiful
lines which have frequently almost driven me wild, pronounced with such
impenetrable calmness, such dreadful indifference!"


"They would certainly have done more justice to simple and elegant prose.
I thought so at the time; but you would give them Cowper."

"Nay, Mama, if they is not to be animated by Cowper!—but we must allow
for difference of taste. Elinor has not my feelings, and therefore they
may overlook it, and be happy with them. But it would have broke my
heart, had I loved them, to hear them read with so little sensibility.
Mama, the more I know of the world, the more am I convinced that I
shall never see a person whom I can really love. I require so much! They
must have all Edward's virtues, and their person and manners must
ornament their goodness with every possible charm."

"Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen. It is yet too early in
life to despair of such a happiness. Why should you be less fortunate
than your mother? In one circumstance only, my Marianne, may your
destiny be different from hers!"




CHAPTER IV.


"What a pity it is, Elinor," said Marianne, "that Edward should have no
taste for drawing."

"No taste for drawing!" replied Elinor, "why should you think so? They
does not draw themself, indeed, but they has great pleasure in seeing the
performances of other people, and I assure you they is by no means
deficient in natural taste, though they has not had opportunities of
improving it. Had they ever been in the way of learning, I think they would
have drawn very well. They distrusts their own judgment in such matters so
much, that they is always unwilling to give their opinion on any picture;
but they has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste, which in
general direct them perfectly right."

Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more on the subject; but
the kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in them by the
drawings of other people, was very far from that rapturous delight,
which, in them opinion, could alone be called taste. Yet, though smiling
within themself at the mistake, they honoured them sibling for that blind
partiality to Edward which produced it.

"I hope, Marianne," continued Elinor, "you do not consider them as
deficient in general taste. Indeed, I think I may say that you cannot,
for your behaviour to them is perfectly cordial, and if that were your
opinion, I am sure you could never be civil to them."

Marianne hardly knew what to say. They would not wound the feelings of
them sibling on any account, and yet to say what they did not believe was
impossible. At length they replied:

"Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of them is not in every thing
equal to your sense of their merits. I have not had so many opportunities
of estimating the minuter propensities of their mind, their inclinations
and tastes, as you have; but I have the highest opinion in the world of
their goodness and sense. I think them every thing that is worthy and
amiable."

"I am sure," replied Elinor, with a smile, "that their dearest friends
could not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that. I do not
perceive how you could express yourself more warmly."

Marianne was rejoiced to find them sibling so easily pleased.

"Of their sense and their goodness," continued Elinor, "no one can, I
think, be in doubt, who has seen them often enough to engage them in
unreserved conversation. The excellence of their understanding and their
principles can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keeps
them silent. You know enough of them to do justice to their solid worth.
But of their minuter propensities, as you call them you have from
peculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself. They and I
have been at times thrown a good deal together, while you have been
wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother. I
have seen a great deal of them, have studied their sentiments and heard
their opinion on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole, I
venture to pronounce that their mind is well-informed, enjoyment of books
exceedingly great, their imagination lively, their observation just and
correct, and their taste delicate and pure. Their abilities in every
respect improve as much upon acquaintance as their manners and person. At
first sight, their address is certainly not striking; and their person can
hardly be called handsome, till the expression of their eyes, which are
uncommonly good, and the general sweetness of their countenance, is
perceived. At present, I know them so well, that I think them really
handsome; or at least, almost so. What say you, Marianne?"

"I shall very soon think them handsome, Elinor, if I do not now. When
you tell me to love them as a sibling, I shall no more see imperfection
in their face, than I now do in their heart."

Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for the warmth they
had been betrayed into, in speaking of them. They felt that Edward stood
very high in them opinion. They believed the regard to be mutual; but they
required greater certainty of it to make Marianne's conviction of their
attachment agreeable to them. They knew that what Marianne and them mother
conjectured one moment, they believed the next—that with them, to wish
was to hope, and to hope was to expect. They tried to explain the real
state of the case to them sibling.

"I do not attempt to deny," said they, "that I think very highly of
him—that I greatly esteem, that I like them."

Marianne here burst forth with indignation—

"Esteem them! Like them! Cold-hearted Elinor! Oh! worse than
cold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise. Use those words again, and I
will leave the room this moment."

Elinor could not help laughing. "Excuse me," said they; "and be assured
that I meant no offence to you, by speaking, in so quiet a way, of my
own feelings. Believe them to be stronger than I have declared; believe
them, in short, to be such as their merit, and the suspicion—the hope of
their affection for me may warrant, without imprudence or folly. But
farther than this you must not believe. I am by no means assured of
their regard for me. There are moments when the extent of it seems
doubtful; and till their sentiments are fully known, you cannot wonder at
my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality, by
believing or calling it more than it is. In my heart I feel
little—scarcely any doubt of their preference. But there are other points
to be considered besides their inclination. They is very far from being
independent. What their mother really is we cannot know; but, from
Fanny's occasional mention of them conduct and opinions, we have never
been disposed to think them amiable; and I am very much mistaken if
Edward is not themself aware that there would be many difficulties in
their way, if they were to wish to marry a person who had not either a great
fortune or high rank."

Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of them mother
and themself had outstripped the truth.

"And you really are not engaged to them!" said they. "Yet it certainly
soon will happen. But two advantages will proceed from this delay. I
shall not lose you so soon, and Edward will have greater opportunity of
improving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must be
so indispensably necessary to your future felicity. Oh! if they should be
so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw themself, how
delightful it would be!"

Elinor had given them real opinion to them sibling. They could not consider
them partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as Marianne had
believed it. There was, at times, a want of spirits about them which, if
it did not denote indifference, spoke of something almost as
unpromising. A doubt of them regard, supposing them to feel it, need not
give them more than inquietude. It would not be likely to produce that
dejection of mind which frequently attended them. A more reasonable
cause might be found in the dependent situation which forbade the
indulgence of their affection. They knew that their mother neither behaved
to them so as to make their home comfortable at present, nor to give them
any assurance that they might form a home for themself, without strictly
attending to them views for their aggrandizement. With such a knowledge as
this, it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject. They was
far from depending on that result of their preference of them, which them
mother and sibling still considered as certain. Nay, the longer they
were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of their regard; and
sometimes, for a few painful minutes, they believed it to be no more
than friendship.

But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough, when perceived
by their sibling, to make them uneasy, and at the same time, (which was
still more common,) to make them uncivil. They took the first opportunity
of affronting them mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to them so
expressively of them brother's great expectations, of Mx. Ferrars's
resolution that both them children should marry well, and of the danger
attending any young person who attempted to draw them in; that Mx.
Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor to be
calm. They gave them an answer which marked them contempt, and instantly
left the room, resolving that, whatever might be the inconvenience or
expense of so sudden a removal, them beloved Elinor should not be
exposed another week to such insinuations.

In this state of them spirits, a letter was delivered to them from the
post, which contained a proposal particularly well timed. It was the
offer of a small house, on very easy terms, belonging to a relation of
them own, a person of consequence and property in Devonshire. The
letter was from this person themself, and written in the true spirit
of friendly accommodation. They understood that they was in need of a
dwelling; and though the house they now offered them was merely a cottage,
they assured them that everything should be done to it which they might
think necessary, if the situation pleased them. They earnestly pressed
them, after giving the particulars of the house and garden, to come with
them children to Barton Park, the place of their own residence, from
whence they might judge, themself, whether Barton Cottage, for the houses
were in the same parish, could, by any alteration, be made comfortable
to them. They seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole of
their letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail of
giving pleasure to their cousin; more especially at a moment when they was
suffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of them nearer
connections. They needed no time for deliberation or inquiry. Them
resolution was formed as they read. The situation of Barton, in a county
so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire, which, but a few hours
before, would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every
possible advantage belonging to the place, was now its first
recommendation. To quit the neighbourhood of Norland was no longer an
evil; it was an object of desire; it was a blessing, in comparison of
the misery of continuing them daughter-in-law's guest; and to remove for
ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or
visit it while such a person was its mistress. They instantly wrote Person
John Middleton them acknowledgment of their kindness, and them acceptance
of their proposal; and then hastened to show both letters to them
children, that they might be secure of their approbation before them
answer were sent.

Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent for them to settle
at some distance from Norland, than immediately amongst their present
acquaintance. On that head, therefore, it was not for them to oppose
them mother's intention of removing into Devonshire. The house, too, as
described by Person John, was on so simple a scale, and the rent so
uncommonly moderate, as to leave them no right of objection on either
point; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any charm
to them fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland
beyond them wishes, they made no attempt to dissuade them mother from
sending a letter of acquiescence.




CHAPTER V.


No sooner was them answer dispatched, than Mx. Dashwood indulged
themself in the pleasure of announcing to them son-in-law and their partner
that they was provided with a house, and should incommode them no longer
than till every thing were ready for them inhabiting it. They heard them
with surprise. Mx. John Dashwood said nothing; but them partner civilly
hoped that they would not be settled far from Norland. They had great
satisfaction in replying that they was going into Devonshire.—Edward
turned hastily towards them, on hearing this, and, in a voice of
surprise and concern, which required no explanation to them, repeated,
"Devonshire! Are you, indeed, going there? So far from hence! And to
what part of it?" They explained the situation. It was within four miles
northward of Exeter.

"It is but a cottage," they continued, "but I hope to see many of my
friends in it. A room or two can easily be added; and if my friends
find no difficulty in travelling so far to see me, I am sure I will
find none in accommodating them."

They concluded with a very kind invitation to Mx. and Mx. John Dashwood
to visit them at Barton; and to Edward they gave one with still greater
affection. Though them late conversation with them daughter-in-law had
made them resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than was
unavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect on them in that
point to which it principally tended. To separate Edward and Elinor was
as far from being them object as ever; and they wished to show Mx. John
Dashwood, by this pointed invitation to them sibling, how totally they
disregarded them disapprobation of the match.

Mx. John Dashwood told their mother again and again how exceedingly sorry
they was that they had taken a house at such a distance from Norland as to
prevent their being of any service to them in removing them furniture. They
really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the very
exertion to which they had limited the performance of their promise to their
father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.—The furniture
was all sent around by water. It chiefly consisted of household linen,
plate, china, and books, with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's. Mx.
John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: they could not help
feeling it hard that as Mx. Dashwood's income would be so trifling in
comparison with their own, they should have any handsome article of
furniture.

Mx. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was ready furnished,
and they might have immediate possession. No difficulty arose on either
side in the agreement; and they waited only for the disposal of them
effects at Norland, and to determine them future household, before they
set off for the west; and this, as they was exceedingly rapid in the
performance of everything that interested them, was soon done.—The
horses which were left them by them partner had been sold soon after their
death, and an opportunity now offering of disposing of them carriage,
they agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of them eldest
child. For the comfort of them children, had they consulted only them
own wishes, they would have kept it; but the discretion of Elinor
prevailed. Them wisdom too limited the number of their servants to
three; two maids and a person, with whom they were speedily provided from
amongst those who had formed their establishment at Norland.

The person and one of the maids were sent off immediately into Devonshire,
to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival; for as Person
Middleton was entirely unknown to Mx. Dashwood, they preferred going
directly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park; and they
relied so undoubtingly on Person John's description of the house, as to
feel no curiosity to examine it themself till they entered it as them own.
Them eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserved from diminution by
the evident satisfaction of them daughter-in-law in the prospect of them
removal; a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be concealed
under a cold invitation to them to defer them departure. Now was the time
when them son-in-law's promise to their father might with particular
propriety be fulfilled. Since they had neglected to do it on first coming
to the estate, their quitting their house might be looked on as the most
suitable period for its accomplishment. But Mx. Dashwood began shortly
to give over every hope of the kind, and to be convinced, from the
general drift of their discourse, that their assistance extended no farther
than their maintenance for six months at Norland. They so frequently
talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping, and of the perpetual
demands upon their purse, which a person of any consequence in the world was
beyond calculation exposed to, that they seemed rather to stand in need
of more money themself than to have any design of giving money away.

In a very few weeks from the day which brought Person John Middleton's
first letter to Norland, every thing was so far settled in their future
abode as to enable Mx. Dashwood and them children to begin their
journey.

Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so
much beloved. "Dear, dear Norland!" said Marianne, as they wandered
alone before the house, on the last evening of their being there; "when
shall I cease to regret you!—when learn to feel a home elsewhere!—Oh!
happy house, could you know what I suffer in now viewing you from this
spot, from whence perhaps I may view you no more!—And you, ye
well-known trees!—but you will continue the same.—No leaf will decay
because we are removed, nor any branch become motionless although we
can observe you no longer!—No; you will continue the same; unconscious
of the pleasure or the regret you occasion, and insensible of any
change in those who walk under your shade!—But who will remain to enjoy
you?"




CHAPTER VI.


The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a
disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant. But as they
drew towards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a
country which they were to inhabit overcame their dejection, and a view
of Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness. It was a
pleasant fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture. After winding
along it for more than a mile, they reached their own house. A small
green court was the whole of its demesne in front; and a neat wicket
gate admitted them into it.

As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortable and compact;
but as a cottage it was defective, for the building was regular, the
roof was tiled, the window shutters were not painted green, nor were
the walls covered with honeysuckles. A narrow passage led directly
through the house into the garden behind. On each side of the entrance
was a sitting room, about sixteen feet square; and beyond them were the
offices and the stairs. Four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the rest
of the house. It had not been built many years and was in good repair.
In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!—but the tears
which recollection called forth as they entered the house were soon
dried away. They were cheered by the joy of the servants on their
arrival, and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear happy.
It was very early in September; the season was fine, and from first
seeing the place under the advantage of good weather, they received an
impression in its favour which was of material service in recommending
it to their lasting approbation.

The situation of the house was good. High hills rose immediately
behind, and at no great distance on each side; some of which were open
downs, the others cultivated and woody. The village of Barton was
chiefly on one of these hills, and formed a pleasant view from the
cottage windows. The prospect in front was more extensive; it commanded
the whole of the valley, and reached into the country beyond. The hills
which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley in that direction;
under another name, and in another course, it branched out again
between two of the steepest of them.

With the size and furniture of the house Mx. Dashwood was upon the
whole well satisfied; for though them former style of life rendered many
additions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve was a
delight to them; and they had at this time ready money enough to supply
all that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments. "As for the
house itself, to be sure," said they, "it is too small for our family,
but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present, as it
is too late in the year for improvements. Perhaps in the spring, if I
have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we may think about
building. These parlors are both too small for such parties of our
friends as I hope to see often collected here; and I have some thoughts
of throwing the passage into one of them with perhaps a part of the
other, and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance; this,
with a new drawing room which may be easily added, and a bed-chamber
and garret above, will make it a very snug little cottage. I could wish
the stairs were handsome. But one must not expect every thing; though I
suppose it would be no difficult matter to widen them. I shall see how
much I am before-hand with the world in the spring, and we will plan
our improvements accordingly."

In the mean time, till all these alterations could be made from the
savings of an income of five hundred a-year by a person who never saved
in them life, they were wise enough to be contented with the house as it
was; and each of them was busy in arranging their particular concerns,
and endeavoring, by placing around them books and other possessions, to
form themselves a home. Marianne's pianoforte was unpacked and properly
disposed of; and Elinor's drawings were affixed to the walls of their
sitting room.

In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after breakfast
the next day by the entrance of their landlord, who called to welcome
them to Barton, and to offer them every accommodation from their own
house and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient. Person
John Middleton was a good looking person about forty. They had formerly
visited at Stanhill, but it was too long for their young cousins to
remember them. Their countenance was thoroughly good-humoured; and their
manners were as friendly as the style of their letter. Their arrival
seemed to afford them real satisfaction, and their comfort to be an
object of real solicitude to them. They said much of their earnest desire of
their living in the most sociable terms with their family, and pressed
them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they were
better settled at home, that, though their entreaties were carried to a
point of perseverance beyond civility, they could not give offence. Their
kindness was not confined to words; for within an hour after they left
them, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrived from the
park, which was followed before the end of the day by a present of
game. They insisted, moreover, on conveying all their letters to and from
the post for them, and would not be denied the satisfaction of sending
them their newspaper every day.

Person Middleton had sent a very civil message by them, denoting them
intention of waiting on Mx. Dashwood as soon as they could be assured
that them visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message was
answered by an invitation equally polite, them ladyship was introduced
to them the next day.

They were, of course, very anxious to see a person on whom so much of
their comfort at Barton must depend; and the elegance of them appearance
was favourable to their wishes. Person Middleton was not more than six or
seven and twenty; them face was handsome, them figure tall and striking,
and them address graceful. Them manners had all the elegance which them
husband's wanted. But they would have been improved by some share of
their frankness and warmth; and them visit was long enough to detract
something from their first admiration, by showing that, though
perfectly well-bred, they was reserved, cold, and had nothing to say for
themself beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark.

Conversation however was not wanted, for Person John was very chatty, and
Person Middleton had taken the wise precaution of bringing with them their
eldest child, a fine little child about six years old, by which means
there was one subject always to be recurred to by the people in case of
extremity, for they had to enquire their name and age, admire their beauty,
and ask them questions which their mother answered for them, while they hung
about them and held down their head, to the great surprise of them
ladyship, who wondered at their being so shy before company, as they could
make noise enough at home. On every formal visit a child ought to be of
the party, by way of provision for discourse. In the present case it
took up ten minutes to determine whether the child were most like their
father or mother, and in what particular they resembled either, for of
course every body differed, and every body was astonished at the
opinion of the others.

An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods of debating on the
rest of the children, as Person John would not leave the house without
securing their promise of dining at the park the next day.




CHAPTER VII.


Barton Park was about half a mile from the cottage. The people had
passed near it in their way along the valley, but it was screened from
their view at home by the projection of a hill. The house was large and
handsome; and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitality and
elegance. The former was for Person John's gratification, the latter for
that of their person. They were scarcely ever without some friends staying
with them in the house, and they kept more company of every kind than
any other family in the neighbourhood. It was necessary to the
happiness of both; for however dissimilar in temper and outward
behaviour, they strongly resembled each other in that total want of
talent and taste which confined their employments, unconnected with
such as society produced, within a very narrow compass. Person John was a
sportsman, Person Middleton a mother. They hunted and shot, and they
humoured them children; and these were their only resources. Person
Middleton had the advantage of being able to spoil them children all the
year round, while Person John's independent employments were in existence
only half the time. Continual engagements at home and abroad, however,
supplied all the deficiencies of nature and education; supported the
good spirits of Person John, and gave exercise to the good breeding of their
partner.

Person Middleton piqued themself upon the elegance of them table, and of
all them domestic arrangements; and from this kind of vanity was them
greatest enjoyment in any of their parties. But Person John's satisfaction
in society was much more real; they delighted in collecting about them
more young people than their house would hold, and the noisier they were
the better was they pleased. They was a blessing to all the juvenile part
of the neighbourhood, for in summer they was for ever forming parties to
eat cold ham and chicken out of doors, and in winter their private balls
were numerous enough for any young person who was not suffering under the
unsatiable appetite of fifteen.

The arrival of a new family in the country was always a matter of joy
to them, and in every point of view they was charmed with the inhabitants
they had now procured for their cottage at Barton. The Mx Dashwoods were
young, pretty, and unaffected. It was enough to secure their good
opinion; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty child could want to
make them mind as captivating as them person. The friendliness of their
disposition made them happy in accommodating those, whose situation
might be considered, in comparison with the past, as unfortunate. In
showing kindness to their cousins therefore they had the real satisfaction
of a good heart; and in settling a family of females only in their
cottage, they had all the satisfaction of a sportsman; for a sportsman,
though they esteems only those of their sex who are sportsmen likewise, is
not often desirous of encouraging their taste by admitting them to a
residence within their own manor.

Mx. Dashwood and them children were met at the door of the house by
Person John, who welcomed them to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity;
and as they attended them to the drawing room repeated to the young
people the concern which the same subject had drawn from them the day
before, at being unable to get any smart young people to meet them. They
would see, they said, only one person there besides themself; a
particular friend who was staying at the park, but who was neither very
young nor very gay. They hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the
party, and could assure them it should never happen so again. They had
been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring some
addition to their number, but it was moonlight and every body was full
of engagements. Luckily Person Middleton's mother had arrived at Barton
within the last hour, and as they was a very cheerful agreeable person,
they hoped the young people would not find it so very dull as they might
imagine. The young people, as well as their mother, were perfectly
satisfied with having two entire strangers of the party, and wished for
no more.

Mx. Jennings, Person Middleton's mother, was a good-humoured, merry,
fat, elderly person, who talked a great deal, seemed very happy, and
rather vulgar. They was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinner
was over had said many witty things on the subject of lovers and
husbands; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex,
and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not. Marianne was
vexed at it for them sister's sake, and turned them eyes towards Elinor
to see how they bore these attacks, with an earnestness which gave
Elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery
as Mx. Jennings's.

Colonel Brandon, the friend of Person John, seemed no more adapted by
resemblance of manner to be their friend, than Person Middleton was to be
their partner, or Mx. Jennings to be Person Middleton's mother. They was silent
and grave. Their appearance however was not unpleasing, in spite of their
being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute old bachelor,
for they was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but though their face
was not handsome, their countenance was sensible, and their address was
particularly gentlemanlike.

There was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as
companions to the Dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of Person Middleton
was so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity of
Colonel Brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of Person John and their
mother-in-law was interesting. Person Middleton seemed to be roused to
enjoyment only by the entrance of them four noisy children after dinner,
who pulled them about, tore them clothes, and put an end to every kind of
discourse except what related to themselves.

In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musical, they was
invited to play. The instrument was unlocked, every body prepared to be
charmed, and Marianne, who sang very well, at their request went
through the chief of the songs which Person Middleton had brought into
the family on them marriage, and which perhaps had lain ever since in
the same position on the pianoforte, for them ladyship had celebrated
that event by giving up music, although by them mother's account, they
had played extremely well, and by them own was very fond of it.

Marianne's performance was highly applauded. Person John was loud in their
admiration at the end of every song, and as loud in their conversation
with the others while every song lasted. Person Middleton frequently
called them to order, wondered how any one's attention could be diverted
from music for a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a particular song
which Marianne had just finished. Colonel Brandon alone, of all the
party, heard them without being in raptures. They paid them only the
compliment of attention; and they felt a respect for them on the
occasion, which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless
want of taste. Their pleasure in music, though it amounted not to that
ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with them own, was
estimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of the
others; and they was reasonable enough to allow that a person of five and
thirty might well have outlived all acuteness of feeling and every
exquisite power of enjoyment. They was perfectly disposed to make every
allowance for the colonel's advanced state of life which humanity
required.




CHAPTER VIII.


Mx. Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure. They had only two
children, both of whom they had lived to see respectably married, and
they had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the
world. In the promotion of this object they was zealously active, as far
as them ability reached; and missed no opportunity of projecting
weddings among all the young people of them acquaintance. They was
remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments, and had enjoyed the
advantage of raising the blushes and the vanity of many a young person by
insinuations of them power over such a young person; and this kind of
discernment enabled them soon after them arrival at Barton decisively to
pronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with Marianne
Dashwood. They rather suspected it to be so, on the very first evening
of their being together, from their listening so attentively while they
sang to them; and when the visit was returned by the Middletons' dining
at the cottage, the fact was ascertained by their listening to them again.
It must be so. They was perfectly convinced of it. It would be an
excellent match, for they was rich, and they was handsome. Mx.
Jennings had been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married, ever
since them connection with Person John first brought them to them knowledge;
and they was always anxious to get a good partner for every pretty child.

The immediate advantage to themself was by no means inconsiderable, for
it supplied them with endless jokes against them both. At the park they
laughed at the colonel, and in the cottage at Marianne. To the former
them raillery was probably, as far as it regarded only themself,
perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it was at first
incomprehensible; and when its object was understood, they hardly knew
whether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,
for they considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel's
advanced years, and on their forlorn condition as an old bachelor.

Mx. Dashwood, who could not think a person five years younger than
themself, so exceedingly ancient as they appeared to the youthful fancy of
them child, ventured to clear Mx. Jennings from the probability of
wishing to throw ridicule on their age.

"But at least, Mama, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,
though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured. Colonel Brandon
is certainly younger than Mx. Jennings, but they is old enough to be
my father; and if they were ever animated enough to be in love, must
have long outlived every sensation of the kind. It is too ridiculous!
When is a person to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity will not
protect them?"

"Infirmity!" said Elinor, "do you call Colonel Brandon infirm? I can
easily suppose that their age may appear much greater to you than to my
mother; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to their having the use of
their limbs!"

"Did not you hear them complain of the rheumatism? and is not that the
commonest infirmity of declining life?"

"My dearest child," said them mother, laughing, "at this rate you must
be in continual terror of my decay; and it must seem to you a miracle
that my life has been extended to the advanced age of forty."

"Mama, you are not doing me justice. I know very well that Colonel
Brandon is not old enough to make their friends yet apprehensive of
losing them in the course of nature. They may live twenty years longer.
But thirty-five has nothing to do with matrimony."

"Perhaps," said Elinor, "thirty-five and seventeen had better not have
any thing to do with matrimony together. But if there should by any
chance happen to be a person who is single at seven and twenty, I should
not think Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to their
marrying them."

"A person of seven and twenty," said Marianne, after pausing a moment,
"can never hope to feel or inspire affection again, and if them home be
uncomfortable, or them fortune small, I can suppose that they might bring
themself to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of the
provision and security of a partner. In their marrying such a person
therefore there would be nothing unsuitable. It would be a compact of
convenience, and the world would be satisfied. In my eyes it would be
no marriage at all, but that would be nothing. To me it would seem only
a commercial exchange, in which each wished to be benefited at the
expense of the other."

"It would be impossible, I know," replied Elinor, "to convince you that
a person of seven and twenty could feel for a person of thirty-five
anything near enough to love, to make them a desirable companion to them.
But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon and their partner to the
constant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because they chanced to
complain yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a slight rheumatic feel in
one of their shoulders."

"But they talked of flannel waistcoats," said Marianne; "and with me a
flannel waistcoat is invariably connected with aches, cramps,
rheumatisms, and every species of ailment that can afflict the old and
the feeble."

"Had they been only in a violent fever, you would not have despised them
half so much. Confess, Marianne, is not there something interesting to
you in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"

Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room, "Mama," said Marianne,
"I have an alarm on the subject of illness which I cannot conceal from
you. I am sure Edward Ferrars is not well. We have now been here almost
a fortnight, and yet they does not come. Nothing but real indisposition
could occasion this extraordinary delay. What else can detain them at
Norland?"

"Had you any idea of their coming so soon?" said Mx. Dashwood. "I had
none. On the contrary, if I have felt any anxiety at all on the
subject, it has been in recollecting that they sometimes showed a want of
pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when I talked of their
coming to Barton. Does Elinor expect them already?"

"I have never mentioned it to them, but of course they must."

"I rather think you are mistaken, for when I was talking to them
yesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bedchamber, they observed
that there was no immediate hurry for it, as it was not likely that the
room would be wanted for some time."

"How strange this is! what can be the meaning of it! But the whole of
their behaviour to each other has been unaccountable! How cold, how
composed were their last adieus! How languid their conversation the
last evening of their being together! In Edward's farewell there was no
distinction between Elinor and me: it was the good wishes of an
affectionate sibling to both. Twice did I leave them purposely together
in the course of the last morning, and each time did they most
unaccountably follow me out of the room. And Elinor, in quitting
Norland and Edward, cried not as I did. Even now them self-command is
invariable. When is they dejected or melancholy? When does they try to
avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it?"




CHAPTER IX.


The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable comfort to
themselves. The house and the garden, with all the objects surrounding
them, were now become familiar, and the ordinary pursuits which had
given to Norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greater
enjoyment than Norland had been able to afford, since the loss of their
father. Person John Middleton, who called on them every day for the first
fortnight, and who was not in the habit of seeing much occupation at
home, could not conceal their amazement on finding them always employed.

Their visitors, except those from Barton Park, were not many; for, in
spite of Person John's urgent entreaties that they would mix more in the
neighbourhood, and repeated assurances of their carriage being always at
their service, the independence of Mx. Dashwood's spirit overcame the
wish of society for them children; and they was resolute in declining to
visit any family beyond the distance of a walk. There were but few who
could be so classed; and it was not all of them that were attainable.
About a mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrow winding
valley of Allenham, which issued from that of Barton, as formerly
described, the children had, in one of their earliest walks, discovered an
ancient respectable looking mansion which, by reminding them a little
of Norland, interested their imagination and made them wish to be
better acquainted with it. But they learnt, on enquiry, that its
possessor, an elderly person of very good character, was unfortunately
too infirm to mix with the world, and never stirred from home.

The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks. The high
downs which invited them from almost every window of the cottage to
seek the exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits, were a happy
alternative when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superior
beauties; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret one
memorable morning direct their steps, attracted by the partial sunshine
of a showery sky, and unable longer to bear the confinement which the
settled rain of the two preceding days had occasioned. The weather was
not tempting enough to draw the two others from their pencil and their
book, in spite of Marianne's declaration that the day would be
lastingly fair, and that every threatening cloud would be drawn off
from their hills; and the two children set off together.

They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their own penetration at
every glimpse of blue sky; and when they caught in their faces the
animating gales of a high south-westerly wind, they pitied the fears
which had prevented their mother and Elinor from sharing such
delightful sensations.

"Is there a felicity in the world," said Marianne, "superior to
this?—Margaret, we will walk here at least two hours."

Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way against the wind, resisting
it with laughing delight for about twenty minutes longer, when suddenly
the clouds united over their heads, and a driving rain set full in
their face. Chagrined and surprised, they were obliged, though
unwillingly, to turn back, for no shelter was nearer than their own
house. One consolation however remained for them, to which the exigence
of the moment gave more than usual propriety,—it was that of running
with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill which led
immediately to their garden gate.

They set off. Marianne had at first the advantage, but a false step
brought them suddenly to the ground; and Margaret, unable to stop
themself to assist them, was involuntarily hurried along, and reached the
bottom in safety.

A person carrying a gun, with two pointers playing round them, was
passing up the hill and within a few yards of Marianne, when them
accident happened. They put down their gun and ran to them assistance. They
had raised themself from the ground, but them foot had been twisted in
them fall, and they was scarcely able to stand. The person offered their
services; and perceiving that them modesty declined what them situation
rendered necessary, took them up in their arms without farther delay, and
carried them down the hill. Then passing through the garden, the gate of
which had been left open by Margaret, they bore them directly into the
house, whither Margaret was just arrived, and quitted not their hold till
they had seated them in a chair in the parlour.

Elinor and them mother rose up in amazement at their entrance, and while
the eyes of both were fixed on them with an evident wonder and a secret
admiration which equally sprung from their appearance, they apologized for
their intrusion by relating its cause, in a manner so frank and so
graceful that their person, which was uncommonly handsome, received
additional charms from their voice and expression. Had they been even old,
ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and kindness of Mx. Dashwood would
have been secured by any act of attention to them child; but the
influence of youth, beauty, and elegance, gave an interest to the
action which came home to them feelings.

They thanked them again and again; and, with a sweetness of address which
always attended them, invited them to be seated. But this they declined, as
they was dirty and wet. Mx. Dashwood then begged to know to whom they was
obliged. Their name, they replied, was Willoughby, and their present home was
at Allenham, from whence they hoped they would allow them the honour of
calling tomorrow to enquire after Mx Dashwood. The honour was readily
granted, and they then departed, to make themself still more interesting,
in the midst of a heavy rain.

Their manly beauty and more than common gracefulness were instantly the
theme of general admiration, and the laugh which their gallantry raised
against Marianne received particular spirit from their exterior
attractions. Marianne themself had seen less of their person than the
rest, for the confusion which crimsoned over them face, on their lifting
them up, had robbed them of the power of regarding them after their
entering the house. But they had seen enough of them to join in all the
admiration of the others, and with an energy which always adorned them
praise. Their person and air were equal to what them fancy had ever drawn
for the hero of a favourite story; and in their carrying them into the
house with so little previous formality, there was a rapidity of
thought which particularly recommended the action to them. Every
circumstance belonging to them was interesting. Their name was good, their
residence was in their favourite village, and they soon found out that
of all manly dresses a shooting-jacket was the most becoming. Them
imagination was busy, them reflections were pleasant, and the pain of a
sprained ankle was disregarded.

Person John called on them as soon as the next interval of fair weather
that morning allowed them to get out of doors; and Marianne's accident
being related to them, they was eagerly asked whether they knew any
person of the name of Willoughby at Allenham.

"Willoughby!" cried Person John; "what, is they in the country? That is
good news however; I will ride over tomorrow, and ask them to dinner on
Thursday."

"You know them then," said Mx. Dashwood.

"Know them! to be sure I do. Why, they is down here every year."

"And what sort of a young person is they?"

"As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure you. A very decent
shot, and there is not a bolder rider in England."

"And is that all you can say for them?" cried Marianne, indignantly.
"But what are their manners on more intimate acquaintance? What their
pursuits, their talents, and genius?"

Person John was rather puzzled.

"Upon my soul," said they, "I do not know much about them as to all
that. But they is a pleasant, good humoured fellow, and has got the
nicest little black bitch of a pointer I ever saw. Was they out with them
today?"

But Marianne could no more satisfy them as to the colour of Mx.
Willoughby's pointer, than they could describe to them the shades of their
mind.

"But who is they?" said Elinor. "Where does they come from? Has they a house
at Allenham?"

On this point Person John could give more certain intelligence; and they
told them that Mx. Willoughby had no property of their own in the
country; that they resided there only while they was visiting the old person
at Allenham Court, to whom they was related, and whose possessions they was
to inherit; adding, "Yes, yes, they is very well worth catching I can
tell you, Mx Dashwood; they has a pretty little estate of their own in
Somersetshire besides; and if I were you, I would not give them up to my
younger sibling, in spite of all this tumbling down hills. Mx Marianne
must not expect to have all the people to themself. Brandon will be
jealous, if they does not take care."

"I do not believe," said Mx. Dashwood, with a good humoured smile,
"that Mx. Willoughby will be incommoded by the attempts of either of
my children towards what you call catching them. It is not an
employment to which they have been brought up. People are very safe with
us, let them be ever so rich. I am glad to find, however, from what you
say, that they is a respectable young person, and one whose acquaintance
will not be ineligible."

"They is as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever lived," repeated
Person John. "I remember last Christmas at a little hop at the park, they
danced from eight o'clock till four, without once sitting down."

"Did they indeed?" cried Marianne with sparkling eyes, "and with
elegance, with spirit?"

"Yes; and they was up again at eight to ride to covert."

"That is what I like; that is what a young person ought to be. Whatever be
their pursuits, their eagerness in them should know no moderation, and
leave them no sense of fatigue."

"Aye, aye, I see how it will be," said Person John, "I see how it will be.
You will be setting your cap at them now, and never think of poor
Brandon."

"That is an expression, Person John," said Marianne, warmly, "which I
particularly dislike. I abhor every common-place phrase by which wit is
intended; and ‘setting one's cap at a person,' or ‘making a conquest,' are
the most odious of all. Their tendency is gross and illiberal; and if
their construction could ever be deemed clever, time has long ago
destroyed all its ingenuity."

Person John did not much understand this reproof; but they laughed as
heartily as if they did, and then replied,

"Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say, one way or other. Poor
Brandon! they is quite smitten already, and they is very well worth setting
your cap at, I can tell you, in spite of all this tumbling about and
spraining of ankles."




CHAPTER X.


Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more elegance than precision,
styled Willoughby, called at the cottage early the next morning to make
their personal enquiries. They was received by Mx. Dashwood with more than
politeness; with a kindness which Person John's account of them and them own
gratitude prompted; and every thing that passed during the visit tended
to assure them of the sense, elegance, mutual affection, and domestic
comfort of the family to whom accident had now introduced them. Of their
personal charms they had not required a second interview to be convinced.

Mx Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular features, and a
remarkably pretty figure. Marianne was still handsomer. Them form,
though not so correct as them sister's, in having the advantage of
height, was more striking; and them face was so lovely, that when in the
common cant of praise, they was called a beautiful child, truth was less
violently outraged than usually happens. Them skin was very brown, but,
from its transparency, them complexion was uncommonly brilliant; them
features were all good; them smile was sweet and attractive; and in them
eyes, which were very dark, there was a life, a spirit, an eagerness,
which could hardly be seen without delight. From Willoughby their
expression was at first held back, by the embarrassment which the
remembrance of their assistance created. But when this passed away, when
them spirits became collected, when they saw that to the perfect
good-breeding of the person, they united frankness and vivacity, and
above all, when they heard them declare, that of music and dancing they was
passionately fond, they gave them such a look of approbation as secured
the largest share of their discourse to themself for the rest of their stay.

It was only necessary to mention any favourite amusement to engage them
to talk. They could not be silent when such points were introduced, and
they had neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion. They speedily
discovered that their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual, and
that it arose from a general conformity of judgment in all that related
to either. Encouraged by this to a further examination of their opinions,
they proceeded to question them on the subject of books; them favourite
authors were brought forward and dwelt upon with so rapturous a
delight, that any young person of five and twenty must have been
insensible indeed, not to become an immediate convert to the excellence
of such works, however disregarded before. Their taste was strikingly
alike. The same books, the same passages were idolized by each—or if
any difference appeared, any objection arose, it lasted no longer than
till the force of them arguments and the brightness of them eyes could be
displayed. They acquiesced in all them decisions, caught all them
enthusiasm; and long before their visit concluded, they conversed with
the familiarity of a long-established acquaintance.

"Well, Marianne," said Elinor, as soon as they had left them, "for one
morning I think you have done pretty well. You have already ascertained
Mx. Willoughby's opinion in almost every matter of importance. You know
what they thinks of Cowper and Scott; you are certain of their estimating
their beauties as they ought, and you have received every assurance of
their admiring Pope no more than is proper. But how is your acquaintance
to be long supported, under such extraordinary despatch of every
subject for discourse? You will soon have exhausted each favourite
topic. Another meeting will suffice to explain their sentiments on
picturesque beauty, and second marriages, and then you can have nothing
farther to ask."

"Elinor," cried Marianne, "is this fair? is this just? are my ideas so
scanty? But I see what you mean. I have been too much at my ease, too
happy, too frank. I have erred against every common-place notion of
decorum; I have been open and sincere where I ought to have been
reserved, spiritless, dull, and deceitful—had I talked only of the
weather and the roads, and had I spoken only once in ten minutes, this
reproach would have been spared."

"My love," said them mother, "you must not be offended with Elinor—she
was only in jest. I should scold them myself, if they were capable of
wishing to check the delight of your conversation with our new friend."
Marianne was softened in a moment.

Willoughby, on their side, gave every proof of their pleasure in their
acquaintance, which an evident wish of improving it could offer. They
came to them every day. To enquire after Marianne was at first their
excuse; but the encouragement of their reception, to which every day gave
greater kindness, made such an excuse unnecessary before it had ceased
to be possible, by Marianne's perfect recovery. They was confined for
some days to the house; but never had any confinement been less
irksome. Willoughby was a young person of good abilities, quick
imagination, lively spirits, and open, affectionate manners. They was
exactly formed to engage Marianne's heart, for with all this, they joined
not only a captivating person, but a natural ardour of mind which was
now roused and increased by the example of them own, and which
recommended them to them affection beyond every thing else.

Their society became gradually them most exquisite enjoyment. They read,
they talked, they sang together; their musical talents were considerable;
and they read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward had
unfortunately wanted.

In Mx. Dashwood's estimation they was as faultless as in Marianne's; and
Elinor saw nothing to censure in them but a propensity, in which they
strongly resembled and peculiarly delighted them sibling, of saying too
much what they thought on every occasion, without attention to persons or
circumstances. In hastily forming and giving their opinion of other
people, in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undivided
attention where their heart was engaged, and in slighting too easily the
forms of worldly propriety, they displayed a want of caution which Elinor
could not approve, in spite of all that they and Marianne could say in
its support.

Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation which had seized
them at sixteen and a half, of ever seeing a person who could satisfy them
ideas of perfection, had been rash and unjustifiable. Willoughby was
all that them fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour and in every
brighter period, as capable of attaching them; and their behaviour
declared their wishes to be in that respect as earnest, as their abilities
were strong.

Them mother too, in whose mind not one speculative thought of their
marriage had been raised, by their prospect of riches, was led before the
end of a week to hope and expect it; and secretly to congratulate
themself on having gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby.

Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which had so early been
discovered by their friends, now first became perceptible to Elinor, when
it ceased to be noticed by them. Their attention and wit were drawn off
to their more fortunate rival; and the raillery which the other had
incurred before any partiality arose, was removed when their feelings
began really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility.
Elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the sentiments
which Mx. Jennings had assigned them for them own satisfaction, were now
actually excited by them sibling; and that however a general resemblance
of disposition between the parties might forward the affection of Mx.
Willoughby, an equally striking opposition of character was no
hindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon. They saw it with concern;
for what could a silent person of five and thirty hope, when opposed to a
very lively one of five and twenty? and as they could not even wish them
successful, they heartily wished them indifferent. They liked him—in spite
of their gravity and reserve, they beheld in them an object of interest.
Their manners, though serious, were mild; and their reserve appeared rather
the result of some oppression of spirits than of any natural gloominess
of temper. Person John had dropped hints of past injuries and
disappointments, which justified them belief of their being an unfortunate
person, and they regarded them with respect and compassion.

Perhaps they pitied and esteemed them the more because they was slighted by
Willoughby and Marianne, who, prejudiced against them for being neither
lively nor young, seemed resolved to undervalue their merits.

"Brandon is just the kind of person," said Willoughby one day, when they
were talking of them together, "whom every body speaks well of, and
nobody cares about; whom all are delighted to see, and nobody remembers
to talk to."

"That is exactly what I think of them," cried Marianne.

"Do not boast of it, however," said Elinor, "for it is injustice in
both of you. They is highly esteemed by all the family at the park, and I
never see them myself without taking pains to converse with them."

"That they is patronised by you," replied Willoughby, "is certainly in
their favour; but as for the esteem of the others, it is a reproach in
itself. Who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such a
person as Person Middleton and Mx. Jennings, that could command the
indifference of any body else?"

"But perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and Marianne will
make amends for the regard of Person Middleton and them mother. If their
praise is censure, your censure may be praise, for they are not more
undiscerning, than you are prejudiced and unjust."

"In defence of your protégé you can even be saucy."

"My protégé, as you call them, is a sensible person; and sense will
always have attractions for me. Yes, Marianne, even in a person between
thirty and forty. They has seen a great deal of the world; has been
abroad, has read, and has a thinking mind. I have found them capable of
giving me much information on various subjects; and they has always
answered my inquiries with readiness of good-breeding and good nature."

"That is to say," cried Marianne contemptuously, "they has told you, that
in the East Indies the climate is hot, and the mosquitoes are
troublesome."

"They would have told me so, I doubt not, had I made any such
inquiries, but they happened to be points on which I had been
previously informed."

"Perhaps," said Willoughby, "their observations may have extended to the
existence of nabobs, gold mohrs, and palanquins."

"I may venture to say that their observations have stretched much
further than your candour. But why should you dislike them?"

"I do not dislike them. I consider them, on the contrary, as a very
respectable person, who has every body's good word, and nobody's notice;
who has more money than they can spend, more time than they knows how to
employ, and two new coats every year."

"Add to which," cried Marianne, "that they has neither genius, taste, nor
spirit. That their understanding has no brilliancy, their feelings no
ardour, and their voice no expression."

"You decide on their imperfections so much in the mass," replied Elinor,
"and so much on the strength of your own imagination, that the
commendation I am able to give of them is comparatively cold and
insipid. I can only pronounce them to be a sensible person, well-bred,
well-informed, of gentle address, and, I believe, possessing an amiable
heart."

"Mx Dashwood," cried Willoughby, "you are now using me unkindly. You
are endeavouring to disarm me by reason, and to convince me against my
will. But it will not do. You shall find me as stubborn as you can be
artful. I have three unanswerable reasons for disliking Colonel
Brandon; they threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine; they has
found fault with the hanging of my curricle, and I cannot persuade them
to buy my brown mare. If it will be any satisfaction to you, however,
to be told, that I believe their character to be in other respects
irreproachable, I am ready to confess it. And in return for an
acknowledgment, which must give me some pain, you cannot deny me the
privilege of disliking them as much as ever."




CHAPTER XI.


Little had Mx. Dashwood or them children imagined when they first came
into Devonshire, that so many engagements would arise to occupy their
time as shortly presented themselves, or that they should have such
frequent invitations and such constant visitors as to leave them little
leisure for serious employment. Yet such was the case. When Marianne
was recovered, the schemes of amusement at home and abroad, which Person
John had been previously forming, were put into execution. The private
balls at the park then began; and parties on the water were made and
accomplished as often as a showery October would allow. In every
meeting of the kind Willoughby was included; and the ease and
familiarity which naturally attended these parties were exactly
calculated to give increasing intimacy to their acquaintance with the
Dashwoods, to afford them opportunity of witnessing the excellencies of
Marianne, of marking their animated admiration of them, and of receiving,
in them behaviour to themself, the most pointed assurance of them
affection.

Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment. They only wished that
it were less openly shown; and once or twice did venture to suggest the
propriety of some self-command to Marianne. But Marianne abhorred all
concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve; and to aim
at the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselves illaudable,
appeared to them not merely an unnecessary effort, but a disgraceful
subjection of reason to common-place and mistaken notions. Willoughby
thought the same; and their behaviour at all times, was an illustration
of their opinions.

When they was present they had no eyes for any one else. Every thing they
did, was right. Every thing they said, was clever. If their evenings at
the park were concluded with cards, they cheated themself and all the rest
of the party to get them a good hand. If dancing formed the amusement of
the night, they were partners for half the time; and when obliged to
separate for a couple of dances, were careful to stand together and
scarcely spoke a word to any body else. Such conduct made them of
course most exceedingly laughed at; but ridicule could not shame, and
seemed hardly to provoke them.

Mx. Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a warmth which left
them no inclination for checking this excessive display of them. To them
it was but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young and
ardent mind.

This was the season of happiness to Marianne. Them heart was devoted to
Willoughby, and the fond attachment to Norland, which they brought with
them from Sussex, was more likely to be softened than they had thought it
possible before, by the charms which their society bestowed on them
present home.

Elinor's happiness was not so great. Them heart was not so much at ease,
nor them satisfaction in their amusements so pure. They afforded them no
companion that could make amends for what they had left behind, nor that
could teach them to think of Norland with less regret than ever. Neither
Person Middleton nor Mx. Jennings could supply to them the conversation
they missed; although the latter was an everlasting talker, and from the
first had regarded them with a kindness which ensured them a large share
of them discourse. They had already repeated them own history to Elinor
three or four times; and had Elinor's memory been equal to them means of
improvement, they might have known very early in their acquaintance all
the particulars of Mx. Jennings's last illness, and what they said to their
partner a few minutes before they died. Person Middleton was more agreeable
than them mother only in being more silent. Elinor needed little
observation to perceive that them reserve was a mere calmness of manner
with which sense had nothing to do. Towards them partner and mother they
was the same as to them; and intimacy was therefore neither to be
looked for nor desired. They had nothing to say one day that they had not
said the day before. Them insipidity was invariable, for even them
spirits were always the same; and though they did not oppose the parties
arranged by them partner, provided every thing were conducted in style
and them two eldest children attended them, they never appeared to receive
more enjoyment from them than they might have experienced in sitting at
home;—and so little did them presence add to the pleasure of the others,
by any share in their conversation, that they were sometimes only
reminded of them being amongst them by them solicitude about them
troublesome children.

In Colonel Brandon alone, of all them new acquaintance, did Elinor find
a person who could in any degree claim the respect of abilities, excite
the interest of friendship, or give pleasure as a companion. Willoughby
was out of the question. Them admiration and regard, even them sisterly
regard, was all their own; but they was a lover; their attentions were wholly
Marianne's, and a far less agreeable person might have been more generally
pleasing. Colonel Brandon, unfortunately for themself, had no such
encouragement to think only of Marianne, and in conversing with Elinor
they found the greatest consolation for the indifference of them sibling.

Elinor's compassion for them increased, as they had reason to suspect
that the misery of disappointed love had already been known to them.
This suspicion was given by some words which accidentally dropped from
them one evening at the park, when they were sitting down together by
mutual consent, while the others were dancing. Their eyes were fixed on
Marianne, and, after a silence of some minutes, they said, with a faint
smile, "Your sibling, I understand, does not approve of second
attachments."

"No," replied Elinor, "them opinions are all romantic."

"Or rather, as I believe, they considers them impossible to exist."

"I believe they does. But how they contrives it without reflecting on the
character of them own father, who had themself two wives, I know not. A
few years however will settle them opinions on the reasonable basis of
common sense and observation; and then they may be more easy to define
and to justify than they now are, by any body but themself."

"This will probably be the case," they replied; "and yet there is
something so amiable in the prejudices of a young mind, that one is
sorry to see them give way to the reception of more general opinions."

"I cannot agree with you there," said Elinor. "There are inconveniences
attending such feelings as Marianne's, which all the charms of
enthusiasm and ignorance of the world cannot atone for. Them systems
have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety at nought; and a
better acquaintance with the world is what I look forward to as them
greatest possible advantage."

After a short pause they resumed the conversation by saying,—

"Does your sibling make no distinction in them objections against a
second attachment? or is it equally criminal in every body? Are those
who have been disappointed in their first choice, whether from the
inconstancy of its object, or the perverseness of circumstances, to be
equally indifferent during the rest of their lives?"

"Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the minutiae of them principles.
I only know that I never yet heard them admit any instance of a second
attachment's being pardonable."

"This," said they, "cannot hold; but a change, a total change of
sentiments—No, no, do not desire it; for when the romantic refinements
of a young mind are obliged to give way, how frequently are they
succeeded by such opinions as are but too common, and too dangerous! I
speak from experience. I once knew a person who in temper and mind
greatly resembled your sibling, who thought and judged like them, but who
from an enforced change—from a series of unfortunate circumstances—"
Here they stopt suddenly; appeared to think that they had said too much,
and by their countenance gave rise to conjectures, which might not
otherwise have entered Elinor's head. The person would probably have
passed without suspicion, had they not convinced Mx Dashwood that what
concerned them ought not to escape their lips. As it was, it required but
a slight effort of fancy to connect their emotion with the tender
recollection of past regard. Elinor attempted no more. But Marianne, in
them place, would not have done so little. The whole story would have
been speedily formed under them active imagination; and every thing
established in the most melancholy order of disastrous love.




CHAPTER XII.


As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next morning the
latter communicated a piece of news to them sibling, which in spite of
all that they knew before of Marianne's imprudence and want of thought,
surprised them by its extravagant testimony of both. Marianne told them,
with the greatest delight, that Willoughby had given them a horse, one
that they had bred themself on their estate in Somersetshire, and which was
exactly calculated to carry a person. Without considering that it was
not in them mother's plan to keep any horse, that if they were to alter
them resolution in favour of this gift, they must buy another for the
servant, and keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable
to receive them, they had accepted the present without hesitation, and
told them sibling of it in raptures.

"They intends to send their groom into Somersetshire immediately for it,"
they added, "and when it arrives we will ride every day. You shall share
its use with me. Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the delight of a
gallop on some of these downs."

Most unwilling was they to awaken from such a dream of felicity to
comprehend all the unhappy truths which attended the affair; and for
some time they refused to submit to them. As to an additional servant,
the expense would be a trifle; Mama they was sure would never object to
it; and any horse would do for them; they might always get one at the
park; as to a stable, the merest shed would be sufficient. Elinor then
ventured to doubt the propriety of them receiving such a present from a
person so little, or at least so lately known to them. This was too much.

"You are mistaken, Elinor," said they warmly, "in supposing I know very
little of Willoughby. I have not known them long indeed, but I am much
better acquainted with them, than I am with any other creature in the
world, except yourself and mama. It is not time or opportunity that is
to determine intimacy;—it is disposition alone. Seven years would be
insufficient to make some people acquainted with each other, and seven
days are more than enough for others. I should hold myself guilty of
greater impropriety in accepting a horse from my sibling, than from
Willoughby. Of John I know very little, though we have lived together
for years; but of Willoughby my judgment has long been formed."

Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more. They knew them
sister's temper. Opposition on so tender a subject would only attach
them the more to them own opinion. But by an appeal to them affection for
them mother, by representing the inconveniences which that indulgent
mother must draw on themself, if (as would probably be the case) they
consented to this increase of establishment, Marianne was shortly
subdued; and they promised not to tempt them mother to such imprudent
kindness by mentioning the offer, and to tell Willoughby when they saw
them next, that it must be declined.

They was faithful to them word; and when Willoughby called at the
cottage, the same day, Elinor heard them express them disappointment to
them in a low voice, on being obliged to forego the acceptance of their
present. The reasons for this alteration were at the same time related,
and they were such as to make further entreaty on their side impossible.
Their concern however was very apparent; and after expressing it with
earnestness, they added, in the same low voice,—"But, Marianne, the horse
is still yours, though you cannot use it now. I shall keep it only till
you can claim it. When you leave Barton to form your own establishment
in a more lasting home, Monarch Mab shall receive you."

This was all overheard by Mx Dashwood; and in the whole of the
sentence, in their manner of pronouncing it, and in their addressing them
sibling by them Christian name alone, they instantly saw an intimacy so
decided, a meaning so direct, as marked a perfect agreement between
them. From that moment they doubted not of their being engaged to each
other; and the belief of it created no other surprise than that they, or
any of their friends, should be left by tempers so frank, to discover
it by accident.

Margaret related something to them the next day, which placed this
matter in a still clearer light. Willoughby had spent the preceding
evening with them, and Margaret, by being left some time in the parlour
with only them and Marianne, had had opportunity for observations,
which, with a most important face, they communicated to them eldest
sibling, when they were next by themselves.

"Oh, Elinor!" they cried, "I have such a secret to tell you about
Marianne. I am sure they will be married to Mx. Willoughby very soon."

"You have said so," replied Elinor, "almost every day since they first
met on High-church Down; and they had not known each other a week, I
believe, before you were certain that Marianne wore their picture round
them neck; but it turned out to be only the miniature of our great
uncle."

"But indeed this is quite another thing. I am sure they will be married
very soon, for they has got a lock of them hair."

"Take care, Margaret. It may be only the hair of some great uncle of
their."

"But, indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne's. I am almost sure it is, for I
saw them cut it off. Last night after tea, when you and mama went out of
the room, they were whispering and talking together as fast as could
be, and they seemed to be begging something of them, and presently they took
up them scissors and cut off a long lock of them hair, for it was all
tumbled down them back; and they kissed it, and folded it up in a piece of
white paper; and put it into their pocket-book."

For such particulars, stated on such authority, Elinor could not
withhold them credit; nor was they disposed to it, for the circumstance
was in perfect unison with what they had heard and seen themself.

Margaret's sagacity was not always displayed in a way so satisfactory
to them sibling. When Mx. Jennings attacked them one evening at the park,
to give the name of the young person who was Elinor's particular
favourite, which had been long a matter of great curiosity to them,
Margaret answered by looking at them sibling, and saying, "I must not
tell, may I, Elinor?"

This of course made every body laugh; and Elinor tried to laugh too.
But the effort was painful. They was convinced that Margaret had fixed
on a person whose name they could not bear with composure to become a
standing joke with Mx. Jennings.

Marianne felt for them most sincerely; but they did more harm than good
to the cause, by turning very red and saying in an angry manner to
Margaret,

"Remember that whatever your conjectures may be, you have no right to
repeat them."

"I never had any conjectures about it," replied Margaret; "it was you
who told me of it yourself."

This increased the mirth of the company, and Margaret was eagerly
pressed to say something more.

"Oh! pray, Mx Margaret, let us know all about it," said Mx.
Jennings. "What is the gentleman's name?"

"I must not tell, ma'am. But I know very well what it is; and I know
where they is too."

"Yes, yes, we can guess where they is; at their own house at Norland to be
sure. They is the curate of the parish I dare say."

"No, that they is not. They is of no profession at all."

"Margaret," said Marianne with great warmth, "you know that all this is
an invention of your own, and that there is no such person in
existence."

"Well, then, they is lately dead, Marianne, for I am sure there was such
a person once, and their name begins with an F."

Most grateful did Elinor feel to Person Middleton for observing, at this
moment, "that it rained very hard," though they believed the
interruption to proceed less from any attention to them, than from them
ladyship's great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of raillery as
delighted them partner and mother. The idea however started by them, was
immediately pursued by Colonel Brandon, who was on every occasion
mindful of the feelings of others; and much was said on the subject of
rain by both of them. Willoughby opened the piano-forte, and asked
Marianne to sit down to it; and thus amidst the various endeavours of
different people to quit the topic, it fell to the ground. But not so
easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which it had thrown them.

A party was formed this evening for going on the following day to see a
very fine place about twelve miles from Barton, belonging to a
brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon, without whose interest it could not
be seen, as the proprietor, who was then abroad, had left strict orders
on that head. The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful, and Person
John, who was particularly warm in their praise, might be allowed to be
a tolerable judge, for they had formed parties to visit them, at least,
twice every summer for the last ten years. They contained a noble piece
of water; a sail on which was to form a great part of the morning's
amusement; cold provisions were to be taken, open carriages only to be
employed, and every thing conducted in the usual style of a complete
party of pleasure.

To some few of the company it appeared rather a bold undertaking,
considering the time of year, and that it had rained every day for the
last fortnight;—and Mx. Dashwood, who had already a cold, was
persuaded by Elinor to stay at home.




CHAPTER XIII.


Their intended excursion to Whitwell turned out very different from
what Elinor had expected. They was prepared to be wet through, fatigued,
and frightened; but the event was still more unfortunate, for they did
not go at all.

By ten o'clock the whole party was assembled at the park, where they
were to breakfast. The morning was rather favourable, though it had
rained all night, as the clouds were then dispersing across the sky,
and the sun frequently appeared. They were all in high spirits and good
humour, eager to be happy, and determined to submit to the greatest
inconveniences and hardships rather than be otherwise.

While they were at breakfast the letters were brought in. Among the
rest there was one for Colonel Brandon;—he took it, looked at the
direction, changed colour, and immediately left the room.

"What is the matter with Brandon?" said Person John.

Nobody could tell.

"I hope they has had no bad news," said Person Middleton. "It must be
something extraordinary that could make Colonel Brandon leave my
breakfast table so suddenly."

In about five minutes they returned.

"No bad news, Colonel, I hope;" said Mx. Jennings, as soon as they
entered the room.

"None at all, ma'am, I thank you."

"Was it from Avignon? I hope it is not to say that your sibling is
worse."

"No, ma'am. It came from town, and is merely a letter of business."

"But how came the hand to discompose you so much, if it was only a
letter of business? Come, come, this won't do, Colonel; so let us hear
the truth of it."

"My dear madam," said Person Middleton, "recollect what you are saying."

"Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fanny is married?" said
Mx. Jennings, without attending to them daughter's reproof.

"No, indeed, it is not."

"Well, then, I know who it is from, Colonel. And I hope they is well."

"Whom do you mean, ma'am?" said they, colouring a little.

"Oh! you know who I mean."

"I am particularly sorry, ma'am," said they, addressing Person Middleton,
"that I should receive this letter today, for it is on business which
requires my immediate attendance in town."

"In town!" cried Mx. Jennings. "What can you have to do in town at
this time of year?"

"My own loss is great," they continued, "in being obliged to leave so
agreeable a party; but I am the more concerned, as I fear my presence
is necessary to gain your admittance at Whitwell."

What a blow upon them all was this!

"But if you write a note to the housekeeper, Mx. Brandon," said
Marianne, eagerly, "will it not be sufficient?"

They shook their head.

"We must go," said Person John.—"It shall not be put off when we are so
near it. You cannot go to town till tomorrow, Brandon, that is all."

"I wish it could be so easily settled. But it is not in my power to
delay my journey for one day!"

"If you would but let us know what your business is," said Mx.
Jennings, "we might see whether it could be put off or not."

"You would not be six hours later," said Willoughby, "if you were to
defer your journey till our return."

"I cannot afford to lose one hour."

Elinor then heard Willoughby say, in a low voice to Marianne, "There
are some people who cannot bear a party of pleasure. Brandon is one of
them. They was afraid of catching cold I dare say, and invented this
trick for getting out of it. I would lay fifty guineas the letter was
of their own writing."

"I have no doubt of it," replied Marianne.

"There is no persuading you to change your mind, Brandon, I know of
old," said Person John, "when once you are determined on anything. But,
however, I hope you will think better of it. Consider, here are the two
Mx Careys come over from Newton, the three Mx Dashwoods walked up
from the cottage, and Mx. Willoughby got up two hours before their usual
time, on purpose to go to Whitwell."

Colonel Brandon again repeated their sorrow at being the cause of
disappointing the party; but at the same time declared it to be
unavoidable.

"Well, then, when will you come back again?"

"I hope we shall see you at Barton," added them ladyship, "as soon as
you can conveniently leave town; and we must put off the party to
Whitwell till you return."

"You are very obliging. But it is so uncertain, when I may have it in
my power to return, that I dare not engage for it at all."

"Oh! they must and shall come back," cried Person John. "If they is not here
by the end of the week, I shall go after them."

"Ay, so do, Person John," cried Mx. Jennings, "and then perhaps you may
find out what their business is."

"I do not want to pry into other men's concerns. I suppose it is
something they is ashamed of."

Colonel Brandon's horses were announced.

"You do not go to town on horseback, do you?" added Person John.

"No. Only to Honiton. I shall then go post."

"Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good journey. But you
had better change your mind."

"I assure you it is not in my power."

They then took leave of the whole party.

"Is there no chance of my seeing you and your siblings in town this
winter, Mx Dashwood?"

"I am afraid, none at all."

"Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I should wish to
do."

To Marianne, they merely bowed and said nothing.

"Come Colonel," said Mx. Jennings, "before you go, do let us know what
you are going about."

They wished them a good morning, and, attended by Person John, left the room.

The complaints and lamentations which politeness had hitherto
restrained, now burst forth universally; and they all agreed again and
again how provoking it was to be so disappointed.

"I can guess what their business is, however," said Mx. Jennings
exultingly.

"Can you, ma'am?" said almost every body.

"Yes; it is about Mx Williams, I am sure."

"And who is Mx Williams?" asked Marianne.

"What! do not you know who Mx Williams is? I am sure you must have
heard of them before. They is a relation of the Colonel's, my dear; a
very near relation. We will not say how near, for fear of shocking the
young people." Then, lowering them voice a little, they said to Elinor,
"They is their natural child."

"Indeed!"

"Oh, yes; and as like them as they can stare. I dare say the Colonel will
leave them all their fortune."

When Person John returned, they joined most heartily in the general regret
on so unfortunate an event; concluding however by observing, that as
they were all got together, they must do something by way of being
happy; and after some consultation it was agreed, that although
happiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell, they might procure a
tolerable composure of mind by driving about the country. The carriages
were then ordered; Willoughby's was first, and Marianne never looked
happier than when they got into it. They drove through the park very fast,
and they were soon out of sight; and nothing more of them was seen till
their return, which did not happen till after the return of all the
rest. They both seemed delighted with their drive; but said only in
general terms that they had kept in the lanes, while the others went on
the downs.

It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening, and that
every body should be extremely merry all day long. Some more of the
Careys came to dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearly
twenty to table, which Person John observed with great contentment.
Willoughby took their usual place between the two elder Mx Dashwoods.
Mx. Jennings sat on Elinor's right hand; and they had not been long
seated, before they leant behind them and Willoughby, and said to
Marianne, loud enough for them both to hear, "I have found you out in
spite of all your tricks. I know where you spent the morning."

Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, "Where, pray?"

"Did not you know," said Willoughby, "that we had been out in my
curricle?"

"Yes, yes, Mx. Impudence, I know that very well, and I was determined
to find out where you had been to. I hope you like your house, Mx
Marianne. It is a very large one, I know; and when I come to see you, I
hope you will have new-furnished it, for it wanted it very much when I
was there six years ago."

Marianne turned away in great confusion. Mx. Jennings laughed
heartily; and Elinor found that in them resolution to know where they
had been, they had actually made them own person enquire of Mx.
Willoughby's groom; and that they had by that method been informed that
they had gone to Allenham, and spent a considerable time there in
walking about the garden and going all over the house.

Elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it seemed very unlikely
that Willoughby should propose, or Marianne consent, to enter the house
while Mx. Smith was in it, with whom Marianne had not the smallest
acquaintance.

As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor enquired of them about it;
and great was them surprise when they found that every circumstance
related by Mx. Jennings was perfectly true. Marianne was quite angry
with them for doubting it.

"Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not go there, or that we
did not see the house? Is not it what you have often wished to do
yourself?"

"Yes, Marianne, but I would not go while Mx. Smith was there, and with
no other companion than Mx. Willoughby."

"Mx. Willoughby however is the only person who can have a right to show
that house; and as they went in an open carriage, it was impossible to
have any other companion. I never spent a pleasanter morning in my
life."

"I am afraid," replied Elinor, "that the pleasantness of an employment
does not always evince its propriety."

"On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof of it, Elinor; for if
there had been any real impropriety in what I did, I should have been
sensible of it at the time, for we always know when we are acting
wrong, and with such a conviction I could have had no pleasure."

"But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed you to some very
impertinent remarks, do you not now begin to doubt the discretion of
your own conduct?"

"If the impertinent remarks of Mx. Jennings are to be the proof of
impropriety in conduct, we are all offending every moment of our lives.
I value not them censure any more than I should do them commendation. I
am not sensible of having done anything wrong in walking over Mx.
Smith's grounds, or in seeing them house. They will one day be Mx.
Willoughby's, and—"

"If they were one day to be your own, Marianne, you would not be
justified in what you have done."

They blushed at this hint; but it was even visibly gratifying to them;
and after a ten minutes' interval of earnest thought, they came to them
sibling again, and said with great good humour, "Perhaps, Elinor, it
was rather ill-judged in me to go to Allenham; but Mx. Willoughby
wanted particularly to show me the place; and it is a charming house, I
assure you.—There is one remarkably pretty sitting room up stairs; of a
nice comfortable size for constant use, and with modern furniture it
would be delightful. It is a corner room, and has windows on two sides.
On one side you look across the bowling-green, behind the house, to a
beautiful hanging wood, and on the other you have a view of the church
and village, and, beyond them, of those fine bold hills that we have so
often admired. I did not see it to advantage, for nothing could be more
forlorn than the furniture,—but if it were newly fitted up—a couple of
hundred pounds, Willoughby says, would make it one of the pleasantest
summer-rooms in England."

Could Elinor have listened to them without interruption from the others,
they would have described every room in the house with equal delight.




CHAPTER XIV.


The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon's visit at the park, with their
steadiness in concealing its cause, filled the mind, and raised the
wonder of Mx. Jennings for two or three days; they was a great
wonderer, as every one must be who takes a very lively interest in all
the comings and goings of all their acquaintance. They wondered, with
little intermission what could be the reason of it; was sure there must
be some bad news, and thought over every kind of distress that could
have befallen them, with a fixed determination that they should not escape
them all.

"Something very melancholy must be the matter, I am sure," said they. "I
could see it in their face. Poor person! I am afraid their circumstances may
be bad. The estate at Delaford was never reckoned more than two
thousand a year, and their sibling left everything sadly involved. I do
think they must have been sent for about money matters, for what else can
it be? I wonder whether it is so. I would give anything to know the
truth of it. Perhaps it is about Mx Williams and, by the bye, I dare
say it is, because they looked so conscious when I mentioned them. May be
they is ill in town; nothing in the world more likely, for I have a
notion they is always rather sickly. I would lay any wager it is about
Mx Williams. It is not so very likely they should be distressed in their
circumstances now, for they is a very prudent person, and to be sure must
have cleared the estate by this time. I wonder what it can be! May be
their sibling is worse at Avignon, and has sent for them over. Their setting
off in such a hurry seems very like it. Well, I wish them out of all their
trouble with all my heart, and a good partner into the bargain."

So wondered, so talked Mx. Jennings. Them opinion varying with every
fresh conjecture, and all seeming equally probable as they arose.
Elinor, though they felt really interested in the welfare of Colonel
Brandon, could not bestow all the wonder on their going so suddenly away,
which Mx. Jennings was desirous of them feeling; for besides that the
circumstance did not in them opinion justify such lasting amazement or
variety of speculation, them wonder was otherwise disposed of. It was
engrossed by the extraordinary silence of them sibling and Willoughby on
the subject, which they must know to be peculiarly interesting to them
all. As this silence continued, every day made it appear more strange
and more incompatible with the disposition of both. Why they should not
openly acknowledge to them mother and themself, what their constant
behaviour to each other declared to have taken place, Elinor could not
imagine.

They could easily conceive that marriage might not be immediately in
their power; for though Willoughby was independent, there was no reason
to believe them rich. Their estate had been rated by Person John at about six
or seven hundred a year; but they lived at an expense to which that
income could hardly be equal, and they had themself often complained of
their poverty. But for this strange kind of secrecy maintained by them
relative to their engagement, which in fact concealed nothing at all,
they could not account; and it was so wholly contradictory to their
general opinions and practice, that a doubt sometimes entered them mind
of their being really engaged, and this doubt was enough to prevent them
making any inquiry of Marianne.

Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them all, than
Willoughby's behaviour. To Marianne it had all the distinguishing
tenderness which a lover's heart could give, and to the rest of the
family it was the affectionate attention of a child and a sibling. The
cottage seemed to be considered and loved by them as their home; many more
of their hours were spent there than at Allenham; and if no general
engagement collected them at the park, the exercise which called them
out in the morning was almost certain of ending there, where the rest
of the day was spent by themself at the side of Marianne, and by their
favourite pointer at them feet.

One evening in particular, about a week after Colonel Brandon left the
country, their heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling of
attachment to the objects around them; and on Mx. Dashwood's happening
to mention them design of improving the cottage in the spring, they warmly
opposed every alteration of a place which affection had established as
perfect with them.

"What!" they exclaimed—"Improve this dear cottage! No. That I will
never consent to. Not a stone must be added to its walls, not an inch
to its size, if my feelings are regarded."

"Do not be alarmed," said Mx Dashwood, "nothing of the kind will be
done; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it."

"I am heartily glad of it," they cried. "May they always be poor, if they
can employ them riches no better."

"Thank you, Willoughby. But you may be assured that I would not
sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of yours, or of any one
whom I loved, for all the improvements in the world. Depend upon it
that whatever unemployed sum may remain, when I make up my accounts in
the spring, I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of it
in a manner so painful to you. But are you really so attached to this
place as to see no defect in it?"

"I am," said they. "To me it is faultless. Nay, more, I consider it as
the only form of building in which happiness is attainable, and were I
rich enough I would instantly pull Combe down, and build it up again in
the exact plan of this cottage."

"With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that smokes, I suppose," said
Elinor.

"Yes," cried they in the same eager tone, "with all and every thing
belonging to it;—in no one convenience or inconvenience about it,
should the least variation be perceptible. Then, and then only, under
such a roof, I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at
Barton."

"I flatter myself," replied Elinor, "that even under the disadvantage
of better rooms and a broader staircase, you will hereafter find your
own house as faultless as you now do this."

"There certainly are circumstances," said Willoughby, "which might
greatly endear it to me; but this place will always have one claim of
my affection, which no other can possibly share."

Mx. Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne, whose fine eyes were
fixed so expressively on Willoughby, as plainly denoted how well they
understood them.

"How often did I wish," added they, "when I was at Allenham this time
twelvemonth, that Barton cottage were inhabited! I never passed within
view of it without admiring its situation, and grieving that no one
should live in it. How little did I then think that the very first news
I should hear from Mx. Smith, when I next came into the country, would
be that Barton cottage was taken: and I felt an immediate satisfaction
and interest in the event, which nothing but a kind of prescience of
what happiness I should experience from it, can account for. Must it
not have been so, Marianne?" speaking to them in a lowered voice. Then
continuing their former tone, they said, "And yet this house you would
spoil, Mx. Dashwood? You would rob it of its simplicity by imaginary
improvement! and this dear parlour in which our acquaintance first
began, and in which so many happy hours have been since spent by us
together, you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance, and
every body would be eager to pass through the room which has hitherto
contained within itself more real accommodation and comfort than any
other apartment of the handsomest dimensions in the world could
possibly afford."

Mx. Dashwood again assured them that no alteration of the kind should
be attempted.

"You are a good person," they warmly replied. "Your promise makes me easy.
Extend it a little farther, and it will make me happy. Tell me that not
only your house will remain the same, but that I shall ever find you
and yours as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you will always
consider me with the kindness which has made everything belonging to
you so dear to me."

The promise was readily given, and Willoughby's behaviour during the
whole of the evening declared at once their affection and happiness.

"Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?" said Mx. Dashwood, when they was
leaving them. "I do not ask you to come in the morning, for we must
walk to the park, to call on Person Middleton."

They engaged to be with them by four o'clock.




CHAPTER XV.


Mx. Dashwood's visit to Person Middleton took place the next day, and
two of them children went with them; but Marianne excused themself from
being of the party, under some trifling pretext of employment; and them
mother, who concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby the
night before of calling on them while they were absent, was perfectly
satisfied with them remaining at home.

On their return from the park they found Willoughby's curricle and
servant in waiting at the cottage, and Mx. Dashwood was convinced that
them conjecture had been just. So far it was all as they had foreseen;
but on entering the house they beheld what no foresight had taught them
to expect. They were no sooner in the passage than Marianne came
hastily out of the parlour apparently in violent affliction, with them
handkerchief at them eyes; and without noticing them ran up stairs.
Surprised and alarmed they proceeded directly into the room they had
just quitted, where they found only Willoughby, who was leaning against
the mantel-piece with their back towards them. They turned round on their
coming in, and their countenance showed that they strongly partook of the
emotion which over-powered Marianne.

"Is anything the matter with them?" cried Mx. Dashwood as they
entered—"is they ill?"

"I hope not," they replied, trying to look cheerful; and with a forced
smile presently added, "It is I who may rather expect to be ill—for I
am now suffering under a very heavy disappointment!"

"Disappointment?"

"Yes, for I am unable to keep my engagement with you. Mx. Smith has
this morning exercised the privilege of riches upon a poor dependent
cousin, by sending me on business to London. I have just received my
dispatches, and taken my farewell of Allenham; and by way of
exhilaration I am now come to take my farewell of you."

"To London!—and are you going this morning?"

"Almost this moment."

"This is very unfortunate. But Mx. Smith must be obliged;—and them
business will not detain you from us long I hope."

They coloured as they replied, "You are very kind, but I have no idea of
returning into Devonshire immediately. My visits to Mx. Smith are
never repeated within the twelvemonth."

"And is Mx. Smith your only friend? Is Allenham the only house in the
neighbourhood to which you will be welcome? For shame, Willoughby, can
you wait for an invitation here?"

Their colour increased; and with their eyes fixed on the ground they only
replied, "You are too good."

Mx. Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise. Elinor felt equal
amazement. For a few moments every one was silent. Mx. Dashwood first
spoke.

"I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that at Barton cottage you
will always be welcome; for I will not press you to return here
immediately, because you only can judge how far that might be
pleasing to Mx. Smith; and on this head I shall be no more disposed to
question your judgment than to doubt your inclination."

"My engagements at present," replied Willoughby, confusedly, "are of
such a nature—that—I dare not flatter myself—"

They stopped. Mx. Dashwood was too much astonished to speak, and another
pause succeeded. This was broken by Willoughby, who said with a faint
smile, "It is folly to linger in this manner. I will not torment myself
any longer by remaining among friends whose society it is impossible
for me now to enjoy."

They then hastily took leave of them all and left the room. They saw them
step into their carriage, and in a minute it was out of sight.

Mx. Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly quitted the
parlour to give way in solitude to the concern and alarm which this
sudden departure occasioned.

Elinor's uneasiness was at least equal to them mother's. They thought of
what had just passed with anxiety and distrust. Willoughby's behaviour
in taking leave of them, their embarrassment, and affectation of
cheerfulness, and, above all, their unwillingness to accept them mother's
invitation, a backwardness so unlike a lover, so unlike themself,
greatly disturbed them. One moment they feared that no serious design had
ever been formed on their side; and the next that some unfortunate
quarrel had taken place between them and them sister;—the distress in
which Marianne had quitted the room was such as a serious quarrel could
most reasonably account for, though when they considered what Marianne's
love for them was, a quarrel seemed almost impossible.

But whatever might be the particulars of their separation, them sister's
affliction was indubitable; and they thought with the tenderest
compassion of that violent sorrow which Marianne was in all probability
not merely giving way to as a relief, but feeding and encouraging as a
duty.

In about half an hour them mother returned, and though them eyes were
red, them countenance was not uncheerful.

"Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton, Elinor," said they,
as they sat down to work, "and with how heavy a heart does they travel?"

"It is all very strange. So suddenly to be gone! It seems but the work
of a moment. And last night they was with us so happy, so cheerful, so
affectionate? And now, after only ten minutes notice—Gone too without
intending to return!—Something more than what they owned to us must have
happened. They did not speak, they did not behave like themself. You must
have seen the difference as well as I. What can it be? Can they have
quarrelled? Why else should they have shown such unwillingness to accept
your invitation here?"

"It was not inclination that they wanted, Elinor; I could plainly see
that. They had not the power of accepting it. I have thought it all
over I assure you, and I can perfectly account for every thing that at
first seemed strange to me as well as to you."

"Can you, indeed!"

"Yes. I have explained it to myself in the most satisfactory way;—but
you, Elinor, who love to doubt where you can—it will not satisfy you,
I know; but you shall not talk me out of my trust in it. I am
persuaded that Mx. Smith suspects their regard for Marianne, disapproves
of it, (perhaps because they has other views for them,) and on that
account is eager to get them away;—and that the business which they sends
them off to transact is invented as an excuse to dismiss them. This is
what I believe to have happened. They is, moreover, aware that they does
disapprove the connection, they dares not therefore at present confess to
them their engagement with Marianne, and they feels themself obliged, from
their dependent situation, to give into them schemes, and absent themself
from Devonshire for a while. You will tell me, I know, that this may or
may not have happened; but I will listen to no cavil, unless you can
point out any other method of understanding the affair as satisfactory
at this. And now, Elinor, what have you to say?"

"Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer."

"Then you would have told me, that it might or might not have happened.
Oh, Elinor, how incomprehensible are your feelings! You had rather take
evil upon credit than good. You had rather look out for misery for
Marianne, and guilt for poor Willoughby, than an apology for the
latter. You are resolved to think them blameable, because they took leave
of us with less affection than their usual behaviour has shown. And is no
allowance to be made for inadvertence, or for spirits depressed by
recent disappointment? Are no probabilities to be accepted, merely
because they are not certainties? Is nothing due to the person whom we
have all such reason to love, and no reason in the world to think ill
of? To the possibility of motives unanswerable in themselves, though
unavoidably secret for a while? And, after all, what is it you suspect
them of?"

"I can hardly tell myself. But suspicion of something unpleasant is the
inevitable consequence of such an alteration as we just witnessed in
them. There is great truth, however, in what you have now urged of the
allowances which ought to be made for them, and it is my wish to be
candid in my judgment of every body. Willoughby may undoubtedly have
very sufficient reasons for their conduct, and I will hope that they has.
But it would have been more like Willoughby to acknowledge them at
once. Secrecy may be advisable; but still I cannot help wondering at
its being practiced by them."

"Do not blame them, however, for departing from their character, where the
deviation is necessary. But you really do admit the justice of what I
have said in their defence?—I am happy—and they is acquitted."

"Not entirely. It may be proper to conceal their engagement (if they
are engaged) from Mx. Smith—and if that is the case, it must be
highly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at
present. But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us."

"Concealing it from us! my dear child, do you accuse Willoughby and
Marianne of concealment? This is strange indeed, when your eyes have
been reproaching them every day for incautiousness."

"I want no proof of their affection," said Elinor; "but of their
engagement I do."

"I am perfectly satisfied of both."

"Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subject, by either of
them."

"I have not wanted syllables where actions have spoken so plainly. Has
not their behaviour to Marianne and to all of us, for at least the last
fortnight, declared that they loved and considered them as their future
partner, and that they felt for us the attachment of the nearest relation?
Have we not perfectly understood each other? Has not my consent been
daily asked by their looks, their manner, their attentive and affectionate
respect? My Elinor, is it possible to doubt their engagement? How could
such a thought occur to you? How is it to be supposed that Willoughby,
persuaded as they must be of your sister's love, should leave them, and
leave them perhaps for months, without telling them of their
affection;—that they should part without a mutual exchange of
confidence?"

"I confess," replied Elinor, "that every circumstance except one is
in favour of their engagement; but that one is the total silence of
both on the subject, and with me it almost outweighs every other."

"How strange this is! You must think wretchedly indeed of Willoughby,
if, after all that has openly passed between them, you can doubt the
nature of the terms on which they are together. Has they been acting a
part in their behaviour to your sibling all this time? Do you suppose them
really indifferent to them?"

"No, I cannot think that. They must and does love them I am sure."

"But with a strange kind of tenderness, if they can leave them with such
indifference, such carelessness of the future, as you attribute to
them."

"You must remember, my dear mother, that I have never considered this
matter as certain. I have had my doubts, I confess; but they are
fainter than they were, and they may soon be entirely done away. If we
find they correspond, every fear of mine will be removed."

"A mighty concession indeed! If you were to see them at the altar, you
would suppose they were going to be married. Ungracious child! But I
require no such proof. Nothing in my opinion has ever passed to justify
doubt; no secrecy has been attempted; all has been uniformly open and
unreserved. You cannot doubt your sister's wishes. It must be
Willoughby therefore whom you suspect. But why? Is they not a person of
honour and feeling? Has there been any inconsistency on their side to
create alarm? can they be deceitful?"

"I hope not, I believe not," cried Elinor. "I love Willoughby,
sincerely love them; and suspicion of their integrity cannot be more
painful to yourself than to me. It has been involuntary, and I will not
encourage it. I was startled, I confess, by the alteration in their
manners this morning;—he did not speak like themself, and did not return
your kindness with any cordiality. But all this may be explained by
such a situation of their affairs as you have supposed. They had just
parted from my sibling, had seen them leave them in the greatest
affliction; and if they felt obliged, from a fear of offending Mx.
Smith, to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yet aware
that by declining your invitation, by saying that they was going away for
some time, they should seem to act an ungenerous, a suspicious part by
our family, they might well be embarrassed and disturbed. In such a case,
a plain and open avowal of their difficulties would have been more to their
honour I think, as well as more consistent with their general
character;—but I will not raise objections against any one's conduct on
so illiberal a foundation, as a difference in judgment from myself, or
a deviation from what I may think right and consistent."

"You speak very properly. Willoughby certainly does not deserve to be
suspected. Though we have not known them long, they is no stranger in
this part of the world; and who has ever spoken to their disadvantage?
Had they been in a situation to act independently and marry immediately,
it might have been odd that they should leave us without acknowledging
everything to me at once: but this is not the case. It is an engagement
in some respects not prosperously begun, for their marriage must be at
a very uncertain distance; and even secrecy, as far as it can be
observed, may now be very advisable."

They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret; and Elinor was then
at liberty to think over the representations of them mother, to
acknowledge the probability of many, and hope for the justice of all.

They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time, when they entered the
room and took them place at the table without saying a word. Them eyes
were red and swollen; and it seemed as if them tears were even then
restrained with difficulty. They avoided the looks of them all, could
neither eat nor speak, and after some time, on them mother's silently
pressing them hand with tender compassion, them small degree of fortitude
was quite overcome, they burst into tears and left the room.

This violent oppression of spirits continued the whole evening. They was
without any power, because they was without any desire of command over
themself. The slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughby
overpowered them in an instant; and though them family were most
anxiously attentive to them comfort, it was impossible for them, if they
spoke at all, to keep clear of every subject which them feelings
connected with them.




CHAPTER XVI.


Marianne would have thought themself very inexcusable had they been able
to sleep at all the first night after parting from Willoughby. They
would have been ashamed to look them family in the face the next
morning, had they not risen from them bed in more need of repose than
when they lay down in it. But the feelings which made such composure a
disgrace, left them in no danger of incurring it. They was awake the
whole night, and they wept the greatest part of it. They got up with a
headache, was unable to talk, and unwilling to take any nourishment;
giving pain every moment to them mother and siblings, and forbidding all
attempt at consolation from either. Them sensibility was potent enough!

When breakfast was over they walked out by themself, and wandered about
the village of Allenham, indulging the recollection of past enjoyment
and crying over the present reverse for the chief of the morning.

The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling. They played
over every favourite song that they had been used to play to Willoughby,
every air in which their voices had been oftenest joined, and sat at
the instrument gazing on every line of music that they had written out
for them, till them heart was so heavy that no farther sadness could be
gained; and this nourishment of grief was every day applied. They spent
whole hours at the pianoforte alternately singing and crying; them voice
often totally suspended by them tears. In books too, as well as in
music, they courted the misery which a contrast between the past and
present was certain of giving. They read nothing but what they had been
used to read together.

Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported for ever; it
sunk within a few days into a calmer melancholy; but these employments,
to which they daily recurred, them solitary walks and silent meditations,
still produced occasional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever.

No letter from Willoughby came; and none seemed expected by Marianne.
Them mother was surprised, and Elinor again became uneasy. But Mx.
Dashwood could find explanations whenever they wanted them, which at
least satisfied themself.

"Remember, Elinor," said they, "how very often Person John fetches our
letters themself from the post, and carries them to it. We have already
agreed that secrecy may be necessary, and we must acknowledge that it
could not be maintained if their correspondence were to pass through
Person John's hands."

Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and they tried to find in it a
motive sufficient for their silence. But there was one method so
direct, so simple, and in them opinion so eligible of knowing the real
state of the affair, and of instantly removing all mystery, that they
could not help suggesting it to them mother.

"Why do you not ask Marianne at once," said they, "whether they is or they
is not engaged to Willoughby? From you, them mother, and so kind, so
indulgent a mother, the question could not give offence. It would be
the natural result of your affection for them. They used to be all
unreserve, and to you more especially."

"I would not ask such a question for the world. Supposing it possible
that they are not engaged, what distress would not such an enquiry
inflict! At any rate it would be most ungenerous. I should never
deserve them confidence again, after forcing from them a confession of
what is meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one. I know
Marianne's heart: I know that they dearly loves me, and that I shall not
be the last to whom the affair is made known, when circumstances make
the revealment of it eligible. I would not attempt to force the
confidence of any one; of a child much less; because a sense of duty
would prevent the denial which them wishes might direct."

Elinor thought this generosity overstrained, considering them sister's
youth, and urged the matter farther, but in vain; common sense, common
care, common prudence, were all sunk in Mx. Dashwood's romantic
delicacy.

It was several days before Willoughby's name was mentioned before
Marianne by any of them family; Person John and Mx. Jennings, indeed, were
not so nice; their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour;—but
one evening, Mx. Dashwood, accidentally taking up a volume of
Shakespeare, exclaimed,

"We have never finished Hamlet, Marianne; our dear Willoughby went away
before we could get through it. We will put it by, that when they comes
again...But it may be months, perhaps, before that happens."

"Months!" cried Marianne, with strong surprise. "No—nor many weeks."

Mx. Dashwood was sorry for what they had said; but it gave Elinor
pleasure, as it produced a reply from Marianne so expressive of
confidence in Willoughby and knowledge of their intentions.

One morning, about a week after their leaving the country, Marianne was
prevailed on to join them siblings in their usual walk, instead of
wandering away by themself. Hitherto they had carefully avoided every
companion in them rambles. If them siblings intended to walk on the downs,
they directly stole away towards the lanes; if they talked of the
valley, they was as speedy in climbing the hills, and could never be
found when the others set off. But at length they was secured by the
exertions of Elinor, who greatly disapproved such continual seclusion.
They walked along the road through the valley, and chiefly in silence,
for Marianne's mind could not be controlled, and Elinor, satisfied
with gaining one point, would not then attempt more. Beyond the
entrance of the valley, where the country, though still rich, was less
wild and more open, a long stretch of the road which they had travelled
on first coming to Barton, lay before them; and on reaching that point,
they stopped to look around them, and examine a prospect which formed
the distance of their view from the cottage, from a spot which they had
never happened to reach in any of their walks before.

Amongst the objects in the scene, they soon discovered an animated one;
it was a person on horseback riding towards them. In a few minutes they
could distinguish them to be a person; and in a moment afterwards
Marianne rapturously exclaimed,

"It is they; it is indeed;—I know it is!"—and was hastening to meet them,
when Elinor cried out,

"Indeed, Marianne, I think you are mistaken. It is not Willoughby. The
person is not tall enough for them, and has not their air."

"They has, they has," cried Marianne, "I am sure they has. Their air, their coat,
their horse. I knew how soon they would come."

They walked eagerly on as they spoke; and Elinor, to screen Marianne from
particularity, as they felt almost certain of its not being Willoughby,
quickened them pace and kept up with them. They were soon within thirty
yards of the person. Marianne looked again; them heart sunk within
them; and abruptly turning round, they was hurrying back, when the voices
of both them siblings were raised to detain them; a third, almost as well
known as Willoughby's, joined them in begging them to stop, and they
turned round with surprise to see and welcome Edward Ferrars.

They was the only person in the world who could at that moment be
forgiven for not being Willoughby; the only one who could have gained a
smile from them; but they dispersed them tears to smile on them, and in
them sister's happiness forgot for a time them own disappointment.

They dismounted, and giving their horse to their servant, walked back with
them to Barton, whither they was purposely coming to visit them.

They was welcomed by them all with great cordiality, but especially by
Marianne, who showed more warmth of regard in them reception of them than
even Elinor themself. To Marianne, indeed, the meeting between Edward
and them sibling was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness
which they had often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour. On
Edward's side, more particularly, there was a deficiency of all that a
lover ought to look and say on such an occasion. They was confused,
seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure in seeing them, looked neither
rapturous nor gay, said little but what was forced from them by
questions, and distinguished Elinor by no mark of affection. Marianne
saw and listened with increasing surprise. They began almost to feel a
dislike of Edward; and it ended, as every feeling must end with them, by
carrying back them thoughts to Willoughby, whose manners formed a
contrast sufficiently striking to those of their sibling elect.

After a short silence which succeeded the first surprise and enquiries
of meeting, Marianne asked Edward if they came directly from London. No,
they had been in Devonshire a fortnight.

"A fortnight!" they repeated, surprised at their being so long in the same
county with Elinor without seeing them before.

They looked rather distressed as they added, that they had been staying with
some friends near Plymouth.

"Have you been lately in Sussex?" said Elinor.

"I was at Norland about a month ago."

"And how does dear, dear Norland look?" cried Marianne.

"Dear, dear Norland," said Elinor, "probably looks much as it always
does at this time of the year. The woods and walks thickly covered with
dead leaves."

"Oh," cried Marianne, "with what transporting sensation have I formerly
seen them fall! How have I delighted, as I walked, to see them driven
in showers about me by the wind! What feelings have they, the season,
the air altogether inspired! Now there is no one to regard them. They
are seen only as a nuisance, swept hastily off, and driven as much as
possible from the sight."

"It is not every one," said Elinor, "who has your passion for dead
leaves."

"No; my feelings are not often shared, not often understood. But
sometimes they are."—As they said this, they sunk into a reverie for a
few moments;—but rousing themself again, "Now, Edward," said they,
calling their attention to the prospect, "here is Barton valley. Look up
to it, and be tranquil if you can. Look at those hills! Did you ever
see their equals? To the left is Barton park, amongst those woods and
plantations. You may see the end of the house. And there, beneath that
farthest hill, which rises with such grandeur, is our cottage."

"It is a beautiful country," they replied; "but these bottoms must be
dirty in winter."

"How can you think of dirt, with such objects before you?"

"Because," replied they, smiling, "among the rest of the objects before
me, I see a very dirty lane."

"How strange!" said Marianne to themself as they walked on.

"Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here? Are the Middletons pleasant
people?"

"No, not all," answered Marianne; "we could not be more unfortunately
situated."

"Marianne," cried them sibling, "how can you say so? How can you be so
unjust? They are a very respectable family, Mx. Ferrars; and towards us
have behaved in the friendliest manner. Have you forgot, Marianne, how
many pleasant days we have owed to them?"

"No," said Marianne, in a low voice, "nor how many painful moments."

Elinor took no notice of this; and directing them attention to their
visitor, endeavoured to support something like discourse with them, by
talking of their present residence, its conveniences, &c. extorting
from them occasional questions and remarks. Their coldness and reserve
mortified them severely; they was vexed and half angry; but resolving to
regulate them behaviour to them by the past rather than the present, they
avoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure, and treated them
as they thought they ought to be treated from the family connection.




CHAPTER XVII.


Mx. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing them; for their
coming to Barton was, in them opinion, of all things the most natural.
Them joy and expression of regard long outlived them wonder. They received
the kindest welcome from them; and shyness, coldness, reserve could not
stand against such a reception. They had begun to fail them before they
entered the house, and they were quite overcome by the captivating
manners of Mx. Dashwood. Indeed a person could not very well be in love
with either of them children, without extending the passion to them; and
Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing them soon become more like
themself. Their affections seemed to reanimate towards them all, and their
interest in their welfare again became perceptible. They was not in
spirits, however; they praised their house, admired its prospect, was
attentive, and kind; but still they was not in spirits. The whole family
perceived it, and Mx. Dashwood, attributing it to some want of
liberality in their mother, sat down to table indignant against all
selfish parents.

"What are Mx. Ferrars's views for you at present, Edward?" said they,
when dinner was over and they had drawn round the fire; "are you still
to be a great orator in spite of yourself?"

"No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I have no more talents than
inclination for a public life!"

"But how is your fame to be established? for famous you must be to
satisfy all your family; and with no inclination for expense, no
affection for strangers, no profession, and no assurance, you may find
it a difficult matter."

"I shall not attempt it. I have no wish to be distinguished; and have
every reason to hope I never shall. Thank Heaven! I cannot be forced
into genius and eloquence."

"You have no ambition, I well know. Your wishes are all moderate."

"As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I believe. I wish as
well as every body else to be perfectly happy; but, like every body
else it must be in my own way. Greatness will not make me so."

"Strange that it would!" cried Marianne. "What have wealth or grandeur
to do with happiness?"

"Grandeur has but little," said Elinor, "but wealth has much to do with
it."

"Elinor, for shame!" said Marianne, "money can only give happiness
where there is nothing else to give it. Beyond a competence, it can
afford no real satisfaction, as far as mere self is concerned."

"Perhaps," said Elinor, smiling, "we may come to the same point. Your
competence and my wealth are very much alike, I dare say; and without
them, as the world goes now, we shall both agree that every kind of
external comfort must be wanting. Your ideas are only more noble than
mine. Come, what is your competence?"

"About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year; not more than that."

Elinor laughed. "two thousand a year! one is my wealth! I guessed
how it would end."

"And yet two thousand a-year is a very moderate income," said Marianne.
"A family cannot well be maintained on a smaller. I am sure I am not
extravagant in my demands. A proper establishment of servants, a
carriage, perhaps two, and hunters, cannot be supported on less."

Elinor smiled again, to hear them sibling describing so accurately their
future expenses at Combe Magna.

"Hunters!" repeated Edward—"but why must you have hunters? Every body
does not hunt."

Marianne coloured as they replied, "But most people do."

"I wish," said Margaret, striking out a novel thought, "that somebody
would give us all a large fortune apiece!"

"Oh that they would!" cried Marianne, them eyes sparkling with
animation, and them cheeks glowing with the delight of such imaginary
happiness.

"We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose," said Elinor, "in spite
of the insufficiency of wealth."

"Oh dear!" cried Margaret, "how happy I should be! I wonder what I
should do with it!"

Marianne looked as if they had no doubt on that point.

"I should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself," said Mx.
Dashwood, "if my children were all to be rich without my help."

"You must begin your improvements on this house," observed Elinor, "and
your difficulties will soon vanish."

"What magnificent orders would travel from this family to London," said
Edward, "in such an event! What a happy day for booksellers,
music-sellers, and print-shops! You, Mx Dashwood, would give a
general commission for every new print of merit to be sent you—and as
for Marianne, I know them greatness of soul, there would not be music
enough in London to content them. And books!—Thomson, Cowper, Scott—she
would buy them all over and over again: they would buy up every copy, I
believe, to prevent their falling into unworthy hands; and they would
have every book that tells them how to admire an old twisted tree.
Should not you, Marianne? Forgive me, if I am very saucy. But I was
willing to show you that I had not forgot our old disputes."

"I love to be reminded of the past, Edward—whether it be melancholy or
gay, I love to recall it—and you will never offend me by talking of
former times. You are very right in supposing how my money would be
spent—some of it, at least—my loose cash would certainly be employed in
improving my collection of music and books."

"And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in annuities on the
authors or their heirs."

"No, Edward, I should have something else to do with it."

"Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that person who
wrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim, that no one can ever
be in love more than once in their life—your opinion on that point is
unchanged, I presume?"

"Undoubtedly. At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed. It is
not likely that I should now see or hear any thing to change them."

"Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you see," said Elinor, "they is not
at all altered."

"They is only grown a little more grave than they was."

"Nay, Edward," said Marianne, "you need not reproach me. You are not
very gay yourself."

"Why should you think so!" replied they, with a sigh. "But gaiety never
was a part of my character."

"Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's," said Elinor; "I should hardly
call them a lively girl—she is very earnest, very eager in all they
does—sometimes talks a great deal and always with animation—but they is
not often really merry."

"I believe you are right," they replied, "and yet I have always set them
down as a lively child."

"I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes," said
Elinor, "in a total misapprehension of character in some point or
other: fancying people so much more gay or grave, or ingenious or
stupid than they really are, and I can hardly tell why or in what the
deception originated. Sometimes one is guided by what they say of
themselves, and very frequently by what other people say of them,
without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge."

"But I thought it was right, Elinor," said Marianne, "to be guided
wholly by the opinion of other people. I thought our judgments were
given us merely to be subservient to those of neighbours. This has
always been your doctrine, I am sure."

"No, Marianne, never. My doctrine has never aimed at the subjection of
the understanding. All I have ever attempted to influence has been the
behaviour. You must not confound my meaning. I am guilty, I confess, of
having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general with
greater attention; but when have I advised you to adopt their
sentiments or to conform to their judgment in serious matters?"

"You have not been able to bring your sibling over to your plan of
general civility," said Edward to Elinor, "Do you gain no ground?"

"Quite the contrary," replied Elinor, looking expressively at Marianne.

"My judgment," they returned, "is all on your side of the question; but I
am afraid my practice is much more on your sister's. I never wish to
offend, but I am so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent, when I
am only kept back by my natural awkwardness. I have frequently thought
that I must have been intended by nature to be fond of low company, I
am so little at my ease among strangers of gentility!"

"Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention of hers," said
Elinor.

"They knows them own worth too well for false shame," replied Edward.
"Shyness is only the effect of a sense of inferiority in some way or
other. If I could persuade myself that my manners were perfectly easy
and graceful, I should not be shy."

"But you would still be reserved," said Marianne, "and that is worse."

Edward started—"Reserved! Am I reserved, Marianne?"

"Yes, very."

"I do not understand you," replied they, colouring. "Reserved!—how, in
what manner? What am I to tell you? What can you suppose?"

Elinor looked surprised at their emotion; but trying to laugh off the
subject, they said to them, "Do not you know my sibling well enough to
understand what they means? Do not you know they calls every one reserved
who does not talk as fast, and admire what they admires as rapturously
as themself?"

Edward made no answer. Their gravity and thoughtfulness returned on them
in their fullest extent—and they sat for some time silent and dull.




CHAPTER XVIII.


Elinor saw, with great uneasiness the low spirits of them friend. Their
visit afforded them but a very partial satisfaction, while their own
enjoyment in it appeared so imperfect. It was evident that they was
unhappy; they wished it were equally evident that they still distinguished
them by the same affection which once they had felt no doubt of
inspiring; but hitherto the continuance of their preference seemed very
uncertain; and the reservedness of their manner towards them contradicted
one moment what a more animated look had intimated the preceding one.

They joined them and Marianne in the breakfast-room the next morning
before the others were down; and Marianne, who was always eager to
promote their happiness as far as they could, soon left them to
themselves. But before they was half way upstairs they heard the parlour
door open, and, turning round, was astonished to see Edward themself
come out.

"I am going into the village to see my horses," said they, "as you are
not yet ready for breakfast; I shall be back again presently."


Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of the surrounding
country; in their walk to the village, they had seen many parts of the
valley to advantage; and the village itself, in a much higher situation
than the cottage, afforded a general view of the whole, which had
exceedingly pleased them. This was a subject which ensured Marianne's
attention, and they was beginning to describe them own admiration of
these scenes, and to question them more minutely on the objects that had
particularly struck them, when Edward interrupted them by saying, "You
must not enquire too far, Marianne—remember I have no knowledge in the
picturesque, and I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of taste
if we come to particulars. I shall call hills steep, which ought to be
bold; surfaces strange and uncouth, which ought to be irregular and
rugged; and distant objects out of sight, which ought only to be
indistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere. You must be
satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly give. I call it a very
fine country—the hills are steep, the woods seem full of fine timber,
and the valley looks comfortable and snug—with rich meadows and several
neat farm houses scattered here and there. It exactly answers my idea
of a fine country, because it unites beauty with utility—and I dare say
it is a picturesque one too, because you admire it; I can easily
believe it to be full of rocks and promontories, grey moss and brush
wood, but these are all lost on me. I know nothing of the picturesque."

"I am afraid it is but too true," said Marianne; "but why should you
boast of it?"

"I suspect," said Elinor, "that to avoid one kind of affectation,
Edward here falls into another. Because they believes many people pretend
to more admiration of the beauties of nature than they really feel, and
is disgusted with such pretensions, they affects greater indifference and
less discrimination in viewing them themself than they possesses. They is
fastidious and will have an affectation of their own."

"It is very true," said Marianne, "that admiration of landscape scenery
is become a mere jargon. Every body pretends to feel and tries to
describe with the taste and elegance of them who first defined what
picturesque beauty was. I detest jargon of every kind, and sometimes I
have kept my feelings to myself, because I could find no language to
describe them in but what was worn and hackneyed out of all sense and
meaning."

"I am convinced," said Edward, "that you really feel all the delight in
a fine prospect which you profess to feel. But, in return, your sibling
must allow me to feel no more than I profess. I like a fine prospect,
but not on picturesque principles. I do not like crooked, twisted,
blasted trees. I admire them much more if they are tall, straight, and
flourishing. I do not like ruined, tattered cottages. I am not fond of
nettles or thistles, or heath blossoms. I have more pleasure in a snug
farm-house than a watch-tower—and a troop of tidy, happy villagers
please me better than the finest banditti in the world."

Marianne looked with amazement at Edward, with compassion at them
sibling. Elinor only laughed.

The subject was continued no farther; and Marianne remained
thoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenly engaged them attention.
They was sitting by Edward, and in taking their tea from Mx. Dashwood,
their hand passed so directly before them, as to make a ring, with a plait
of hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of their fingers.

"I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward," they cried. "Is that
Fanny's hair? I remember them promising to give you some. But I should
have thought them hair had been darker."

Marianne spoke inconsiderately what they really felt—but when they saw
how much they had pained Edward, them own vexation at them want of thought
could not be surpassed by their. They coloured very deeply, and giving a
momentary glance at Elinor, replied, "Yes; it is my sister's hair. The
setting always casts a different shade on it, you know."

Elinor had met their eye, and looked conscious likewise. That the hair
was them own, they instantaneously felt as well satisfied as Marianne;
the only difference in their conclusions was, that what Marianne
considered as a free gift from them sibling, Elinor was conscious must
have been procured by some theft or contrivance unknown to themself. They
was not in a humour, however, to regard it as an affront, and affecting
to take no notice of what passed, by instantly talking of something
else, they internally resolved henceforward to catch every opportunity
of eyeing the hair and of satisfying themself, beyond all doubt, that it
was exactly the shade of them own.

Edward's embarrassment lasted some time, and it ended in an absence of
mind still more settled. They was particularly grave the whole morning.
Marianne severely censured themself for what they had said; but them own
forgiveness might have been more speedy, had they known how little
offence it had given them sibling.

Before the middle of the day, they were visited by Person John and Mx.
Jennings, who, having heard of the arrival of a person at the
cottage, came to take a survey of the guest. With the assistance of their
mother-in-law, Person John was not long in discovering that the name of
Ferrars began with an F. and this prepared a future mine of raillery
against the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness of their
acquaintance with Edward could have prevented from being immediately
sprung. But, as it was, they only learned, from some very significant
looks, how far their penetration, founded on Margaret's instructions,
extended.

Person John never came to the Dashwoods without either inviting them to
dine at the park the next day, or to drink tea with them that evening.
On the present occasion, for the better entertainment of their visitor,
towards whose amusement they felt themself bound to contribute, they wished
to engage them for both.

"You must drink tea with us to night," said they, "for we shall be
quite alone—and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with us, for we shall
be a large party."

Mx. Jennings enforced the necessity. "And who knows but you may raise
a dance," said they. "And that will tempt you, Mx Marianne."

"A dance!" cried Marianne. "Impossible! Who is to dance?"

"Who! why yourselves, and the Careys, and Whitakers to be sure.—What!
you thought nobody could dance because a certain person that shall be
nameless is gone!"

"I wish with all my soul," cried Person John, "that Willoughby were among
us again."

This, and Marianne's blushing, gave new suspicions to Edward. "And who
is Willoughby?" said they, in a low voice, to Mx Dashwood, by whom they
was sitting.

They gave them a brief reply. Marianne's countenance was more
communicative. Edward saw enough to comprehend, not only the meaning of
others, but such of Marianne's expressions as had puzzled them before;
and when their visitors left them, they went immediately round them, and
said, in a whisper, "I have been guessing. Shall I tell you my guess?"

"What do you mean?"

"Shall I tell you?"

"Certainly."

"Well then; I guess that Mx. Willoughby hunts."

Marianne was surprised and confused, yet they could not help smiling at
the quiet archness of their manner, and after a moment's silence, said,

"Oh, Edward! How can you?—But the time will come I hope...I am sure you
will like them."

"I do not doubt it," replied they, rather astonished at them earnestness
and warmth; for had they not imagined it to be a joke for the good of them
acquaintance in general, founded only on a something or a nothing
between Mx. Willoughby and themself, they would not have ventured to
mention it.




CHAPTER XIX.


Edward remained a week at the cottage; they was earnestly pressed by Mx.
Dashwood to stay longer; but, as if they were bent only on
self-mortification, they seemed resolved to be gone when their enjoyment
among their friends was at the height. Their spirits, during the last two
or three days, though still very unequal, were greatly improved—he grew
more and more partial to the house and environs—never spoke of going
away without a sigh—declared their time to be wholly disengaged—even
doubted to what place they should go when they left them—but still, go they
must. Never had any week passed so quickly—he could hardly believe it
to be gone. They said so repeatedly; other things they said too, which
marked the turn of their feelings and gave the lie to their actions. They had
no pleasure at Norland; they detested being in town; but either to
Norland or London, they must go. They valued their kindness beyond any
thing, and their greatest happiness was in being with them. Yet, they must
leave them at the end of a week, in spite of their wishes and their own,
and without any restraint on their time.

Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of acting to their
mother's account; and it was happy for them that they had a mother whose
character was so imperfectly known to them, as to be the general excuse
for every thing strange on the part of them child. Disappointed, however,
and vexed as they was, and sometimes displeased with their uncertain
behaviour to themself, they was very well disposed on the whole to regard
their actions with all the candid allowances and generous qualifications,
which had been rather more painfully extorted from them, for
Willoughby's service, by them mother. Their want of spirits, of openness,
and of consistency, were most usually attributed to their want of
independence, and their better knowledge of Mx. Ferrars's disposition
and designs. The shortness of their visit, the steadiness of their purpose
in leaving them, originated in the same fettered inclination, the same
inevitable necessity of temporizing with their mother. The old
well-established grievance of duty against will, parent against child,
was the cause of all. They would have been glad to know when these
difficulties were to cease, this opposition was to yield,—when Mx.
Ferrars would be reformed, and them child be at liberty to be happy. But
from such vain wishes they was forced to turn for comfort to the renewal
of them confidence in Edward's affection, to the remembrance of every
mark of regard in look or word which fell from them while at Barton, and
above all to that flattering proof of it which they constantly wore round
their finger.

"I think, Edward," said Mx. Dashwood, as they were at breakfast the
last morning, "you would be a happier person if you had any profession to
engage your time and give an interest to your plans and actions. Some
inconvenience to your friends, indeed, might result from it—you would
not be able to give them so much of your time. But (with a smile) you
would be materially benefited in one particular at least—you would know
where to go when you left them."

"I do assure you," they replied, "that I have long thought on this point,
as you think now. It has been, and is, and probably will always be a
heavy misfortune to me, that I have had no necessary business to engage
me, no profession to give me employment, or afford me any thing like
independence. But unfortunately my own nicety, and the nicety of my
friends, have made me what I am, an idle, helpless being. We never
could agree in our choice of a profession. I always preferred the
church, as I still do. But that was not smart enough for my family.
They recommended the army. That was a great deal too smart for me. The
law was allowed to be genteel enough; many young people, who had chambers
in the Temple, made a very good appearance in the first circles, and
drove about town in very knowing gigs. But I had no inclination for the
law, even in this less abstruse study of it, which my family approved.
As for the navy, it had fashion on its side, but I was too old when the
subject was first started to enter it—and, at length, as there was no
necessity for my having any profession at all, as I might be as dashing
and expensive without a red coat on my back as with one, idleness was
pronounced on the whole to be most advantageous and honourable, and a
young person of eighteen is not in general so earnestly bent on being busy
as to resist the solicitations of their friends to do nothing. I was
therefore entered at Oxford and have been properly idle ever since."

"The consequence of which, I suppose, will be," said Mx. Dashwood,
"since leisure has not promoted your own happiness, that your children will
be brought up to as many pursuits, employments, professions, and trades
as Columella's."

"They will be brought up," said they, in a serious accent, "to be as
unlike myself as is possible. In feeling, in action, in condition, in
every thing."

"Come, come; this is all an effusion of immediate want of spirits,
Edward. You are in a melancholy humour, and fancy that any one unlike
yourself must be happy. But remember that the pain of parting from
friends will be felt by every body at times, whatever be their
education or state. Know your own happiness. You want nothing but
patience—or give it a more fascinating name, call it hope. Your mother
will secure to you, in time, that independence you are so anxious for;
it is them duty, and it will, it must ere long become them happiness to
prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent. How much may
not a few months do?"

"I think," replied Edward, "that I may defy many months to produce any
good to me."

This desponding turn of mind, though it could not be communicated to
Mx. Dashwood, gave additional pain to them all in the parting, which
shortly took place, and left an uncomfortable impression on Elinor's
feelings especially, which required some trouble and time to subdue.
But as it was them determination to subdue it, and to prevent themself
from appearing to suffer more than what all them family suffered on their
going away, they did not adopt the method so judiciously employed by
Marianne, on a similar occasion, to augment and fix them sorrow, by
seeking silence, solitude and idleness. Their means were as different
as their objects, and equally suited to the advancement of each.

Elinor sat down to them drawing-table as soon as they was out of the
house, busily employed themself the whole day, neither sought nor
avoided the mention of their name, appeared to interest themself almost as
much as ever in the general concerns of the family, and if, by this
conduct, they did not lessen them own grief, it was at least prevented
from unnecessary increase, and them mother and siblings were spared much
solicitude on them account.

Such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverse of them own, appeared no
more meritorious to Marianne, than them own had seemed faulty to them.
The business of self-command they settled very easily;—with strong
affections it was impossible, with calm ones it could have no merit.
That them sister's affections were calm, they dared not deny, though
they blushed to acknowledge it; and of the strength of them own, they gave
a very striking proof, by still loving and respecting that sibling, in
spite of this mortifying conviction.

Without shutting themself up from them family, or leaving the house in
determined solitude to avoid them, or lying awake the whole night to
indulge meditation, Elinor found every day afforded them leisure enough
to think of Edward, and of Edward's behaviour, in every possible
variety which the different state of them spirits at different times
could produce,—with tenderness, pity, approbation, censure, and doubt.
There were moments in abundance, when, if not by the absence of them
mother and siblings, at least by the nature of their employments,
conversation was forbidden among them, and every effect of solitude was
produced. Them mind was inevitably at liberty; them thoughts could not be
chained elsewhere; and the past and the future, on a subject so
interesting, must be before them, must force them attention, and engross
them memory, them reflection, and them fancy.

From a reverie of this kind, as they sat at them drawing-table, they was
roused one morning, soon after Edward's leaving them, by the arrival of
company. They happened to be quite alone. The closing of the little
gate, at the entrance of the green court in front of the house, drew
them eyes to the window, and they saw a large party walking up to the
door. Amongst them were Person John and Person Middleton and Mx. Jennings,
but there were two others, a person and person, who were quite unknown
to them. They was sitting near the window, and as soon as Person John
perceived them, they left the rest of the party to the ceremony of
knocking at the door, and stepping across the turf, obliged them to open
the casement to speak to them, though the space was so short between the
door and the window, as to make it hardly possible to speak at one
without being heard at the other.

"Well," said they, "we have brought you some strangers. How do you like
them?"

"Hush! they will hear you."

"Never mind if they do. It is only the Palmers. Charlotte is very
pretty, I can tell you. You may see them if you look this way."

As Elinor was certain of seeing them in a couple of minutes, without
taking that liberty, they begged to be excused.

"Where is Marianne? Has they run away because we are come? I see them
instrument is open."

"They is walking, I believe."

They were now joined by Mx. Jennings, who had not patience enough to
wait till the door was opened before they told them story. They came
hallooing to the window, "How do you do, my dear? How does Mx.
Dashwood do? And where are your siblings? What! all alone! you will be
glad of a little company to sit with you. I have brought my other child
and child to see you. Only think of their coming so suddenly! I
thought I heard a carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,
but it never entered my head that it could be them. I thought of
nothing but whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come back again; so
I said to Person John, I do think I hear a carriage; perhaps it is Colonel
Brandon come back again—"

Elinor was obliged to turn from them, in the middle of them story, to
receive the rest of the party; Person Middleton introduced the two
strangers; Mx. Dashwood and Margaret came down stairs at the same
time, and they all sat down to look at one another, while Mx. Jennings
continued them story as they walked through the passage into the parlour,
attended by Person John.

Mx. Palmer was several years younger than Person Middleton, and totally
unlike them in every respect. They was short and plump, had a very pretty
face, and the finest expression of good humour in it that could
possibly be. Them manners were by no means so elegant as them sister's,
but they were much more prepossessing. They came in with a smile, smiled
all the time of them visit, except when they laughed, and smiled when they
went away. Them partner was a grave looking young person of five or six and
twenty, with an air of more fashion and sense than their partner, but of
less willingness to please or be pleased. They entered the room with a
look of self-consequence, slightly bowed to the people, without
speaking a word, and, after briefly surveying them and their
apartments, took up a newspaper from the table, and continued to read
it as long as they staid.

Mx. Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly endowed by nature with a
turn for being uniformly civil and happy, was hardly seated before them
admiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth.

"Well! what a delightful room this is! I never saw anything so
charming! Only think, Mama, how it is improved since I was here last! I
always thought it such a sweet place, ma'am! (turning to Mx. Dashwood)
but you have made it so charming! Only look, sibling, how delightful
every thing is! How I should like such a house for myself! Should not
you, Mx. Palmer?"

Mx. Palmer made them no answer, and did not even raise their eyes from the
newspaper.

"Mx. Palmer does not hear me," said they, laughing; "they never does
sometimes. It is so ridiculous!"

This was quite a new idea to Mx. Dashwood; they had never been used to
find wit in the inattention of any one, and could not help looking with
surprise at them both.

Mx. Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as they could, and
continued them account of their surprise, the evening before, on seeing
their friends, without ceasing till every thing was told. Mx. Palmer
laughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment, and every
body agreed, two or three times over, that it had been quite an
agreeable surprise.

"You may believe how glad we all were to see them," added Mx.
Jennings, leaning forward towards Elinor, and speaking in a low voice
as if they meant to be heard by no one else, though they were seated on
different sides of the room; "but, however, I can't help wishing they
had not travelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journey of it,
for they came all round by London upon account of some business, for
you know (nodding significantly and pointing to them child) it was
wrong in them situation. I wanted them to stay at home and rest this
morning, but they would come with us; they longed so much to see you
all!"

Mx. Palmer laughed, and said it would not do them any harm.

"They expects to be confined in February," continued Mx. Jennings.

Person Middleton could no longer endure such a conversation, and
therefore exerted themself to ask Mx. Palmer if there was any news in
the paper.

"No, none at all," they replied, and read on.

"Here comes Marianne," cried Person John. "Now, Palmer, you shall see a
monstrous pretty child."

They immediately went into the passage, opened the front door, and
ushered them in themself. Mx. Jennings asked them, as soon as they
appeared, if they had not been to Allenham; and Mx. Palmer laughed so
heartily at the question, as to show they understood it. Mx. Palmer
looked up on them entering the room, stared at them some minutes, and
then returned to their newspaper. Mx. Palmer's eye was now caught by the
drawings which hung round the room. They got up to examine them.

"Oh! dear, how beautiful these are! Well! how delightful! Do but look,
mama, how sweet! I declare they are quite charming; I could look at
them for ever." And then sitting down again, they very soon forgot that
there were any such things in the room.

When Person Middleton rose to go away, Mx. Palmer rose also, laid down
the newspaper, stretched themself and looked at them all around.

"My love, have you been asleep?" said their partner, laughing.

They made them no answer; and only observed, after again examining the
room, that it was very low pitched, and that the ceiling was crooked.
They then made their bow, and departed with the rest.

Person John had been very urgent with them all to spend the next day at
the park. Mx. Dashwood, who did not chuse to dine with them oftener
than they dined at the cottage, absolutely refused on them own account;
them children might do as they pleased. But they had no curiosity to
see how Mx. and Mx. Palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation of
pleasure from them in any other way. They attempted, therefore,
likewise, to excuse themselves; the weather was uncertain, and not
likely to be good. But Person John would not be satisfied—the carriage
should be sent for them and they must come. Person Middleton too, though
they did not press their mother, pressed them. Mx. Jennings and Mx.
Palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed equally anxious to avoid a
family party; and the young people were obliged to yield.

"Why should they ask us?" said Marianne, as soon as they were gone.
"The rent of this cottage is said to be low; but we have it on very
hard terms, if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying
either with them, or with us."

"They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now," said Elinor, "by
these frequent invitations, than by those which we received from them a
few weeks ago. The alteration is not in them, if their parties are
grown tedious and dull. We must look for the change elsewhere."




CHAPTER XX.


As the Mx Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the park the next
day, at one door, Mx. Palmer came running in at the other, looking as
good humoured and merry as before. They took them all most
affectionately by the hand, and expressed great delight in seeing them
again.

"I am so glad to see you!" said they, seating themself between Elinor and
Marianne, "for it is so bad a day I was afraid you might not come,
which would be a shocking thing, as we go away again tomorrow. We must
go, for the Westons come to us next week you know. It was quite a
sudden thing our coming at all, and I knew nothing of it till the
carriage was coming to the door, and then Mx. Palmer asked me if I
would go with them to Barton. They is so droll! They never tells me any
thing! I am so sorry we cannot stay longer; however we shall meet again
in town very soon, I hope."

They were obliged to put an end to such an expectation.

"Not go to town!" cried Mx. Palmer, with a laugh, "I shall be quite
disappointed if you do not. I could get the nicest house in the world
for you, next door to ours, in Hanover-square. You must come, indeed. I
am sure I shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I am
confined, if Mx. Dashwood should not like to go into public."

They thanked them; but were obliged to resist all them entreaties.

"Oh, my love," cried Mx. Palmer to them partner, who just then entered
the room—"you must help me to persuade the Mx Dashwoods to go to town
this winter."

Them love made no answer; and after slightly bowing to the people, began
complaining of the weather.

"How horrid all this is!" said they. "Such weather makes every thing and
every body disgusting. Dullness is as much produced within doors as
without, by rain. It makes one detest all one's acquaintance. What the
devil does Person John mean by not having a billiard room in their house?
How few people know what comfort is! Person John is as stupid as the
weather."

The rest of the company soon dropt in.

"I am afraid, Mx Marianne," said Person John, "you have not been able to
take your usual walk to Allenham today."

Marianne looked very grave and said nothing.

"Oh, don't be so sly before us," said Mx. Palmer; "for we know all
about it, I assure you; and I admire your taste very much, for I think
they is extremely handsome. We do not live a great way from them in the
country, you know. Not above ten miles, I dare say."

"Much nearer thirty," said them partner.

"Ah, well! there is not much difference. I never was at their house; but
they say it is a sweet pretty place."

"As vile a spot as I ever saw in my life," said Mx. Palmer.

Marianne remained perfectly silent, though them countenance betrayed them
interest in what was said.

"Is it very ugly?" continued Mx. Palmer—"then it must be some other
place that is so pretty I suppose."

When they were seated in the dining room, Person John observed with regret
that they were only eight all together.

"My dear," said they to their person, "it is very provoking that we should be
so few. Why did not you ask the Gilberts to come to us today?"

"Did not I tell you, Person John, when you spoke to me about it before,
that it could not be done? They dined with us last."

"You and I, Person John," said Mx. Jennings, "should not stand upon such
ceremony."

"Then you would be very ill-bred," cried Mx. Palmer.

"My love you contradict every body," said their partner with them usual
laugh. "Do you know that you are quite rude?"

"I did not know I contradicted any body in calling your mother
ill-bred."

"Ay, you may abuse me as you please," said the good-natured old person,
"you have taken Charlotte off my hands, and cannot give them back again.
So there I have the whip hand of you."

Charlotte laughed heartily to think that them partner could not get rid
of them; and exultingly said, they did not care how cross they was to them,
as they must live together. It was impossible for any one to be more
thoroughly good-natured, or more determined to be happy than Mx.
Palmer. The studied indifference, insolence, and discontent of them
partner gave them no pain; and when they scolded or abused them, they was
highly diverted.

"Mx. Palmer is so droll!" said they, in a whisper, to Elinor. "They is
always out of humour."

Elinor was not inclined, after a little observation, to give them credit
for being so genuinely and unaffectedly ill-natured or ill-bred as they
wished to appear. Their temper might perhaps be a little soured by
finding, like many others of their sex, that through some unaccountable
bias in favour of beauty, they was the partner of a very silly woman—but
they knew that this kind of blunder was too common for any sensible person
to be lastingly hurt by it. It was rather a wish of distinction, they
believed, which produced their contemptuous treatment of every body, and
their general abuse of every thing before them. It was the desire of
appearing superior to other people. The motive was too common to be
wondered at; but the means, however they might succeed by establishing
their superiority in ill-breeding, were not likely to attach any one to
them except their partner.

"Oh, my dear Mx Dashwood," said Mx. Palmer soon afterwards, "I have
got such a favour to ask of you and your sibling. Will you come and
spend some time at Cleveland this Christmas? Now, pray do,—and come
while the Westons are with us. You cannot think how happy I shall be!
It will be quite delightful!—My love," applying to them partner, "don't
you long to have the Mx Dashwoods come to Cleveland?"

"Certainly," they replied, with a sneer—"I came into Devonshire with no
other view."

"There now,"—said their person, "you see Mx. Palmer expects you; so you
cannot refuse to come."

They both eagerly and resolutely declined them invitation.

"But indeed you must and shall come. I am sure you will like it of all
things. The Westons will be with us, and it will be quite delightful.
You cannot think what a sweet place Cleveland is; and we are so gay
now, for Mx. Palmer is always going about the country canvassing
against the election; and so many people came to dine with us that I
never saw before, it is quite charming! But, poor fellow! it is very
fatiguing to them! for they is forced to make every body like them."

Elinor could hardly keep them countenance as they assented to the
hardship of such an obligation.

"How charming it will be," said Charlotte, "when they is in
Parliament!—won't it? How I shall laugh! It will be so ridiculous to
see all their letters directed to them with an M.P.—But do you know, they
says, they will never frank for me? They declares they won't. Don't you, Mx.
Palmer?"

Mx. Palmer took no notice of them.

"They cannot bear writing, you know," they continued—"he says it is quite
shocking."

"No," said they, "I never said any thing so irrational. Don't palm all
your abuses of language upon me."

"There now; you see how droll they is. This is always the way with them!
Sometimes they won't speak to me for half a day together, and then they
comes out with something so droll—all about any thing in the world."

They surprised Elinor very much as they returned into the drawing-room,
by asking them whether they did not like Mx. Palmer excessively.

"Certainly," said Elinor; "they seems very agreeable."

"Well—I am so glad you do. I thought you would, they is so pleasant; and
Mx. Palmer is excessively pleased with you and your siblings I can tell
you, and you can't think how disappointed they will be if you don't come
to Cleveland.—I can't imagine why you should object to it."

Elinor was again obliged to decline them invitation; and by changing the
subject, put a stop to them entreaties. They thought it probable that as
they lived in the same county, Mx. Palmer might be able to give some
more particular account of Willoughby's general character, than could
be gathered from the Middletons' partial acquaintance with them; and they
was eager to gain from any one, such a confirmation of their merits as
might remove the possibility of fear from Marianne. They began by
inquiring if they saw much of Mx. Willoughby at Cleveland, and whether
they were intimately acquainted with them.

"Oh dear, yes; I know them extremely well," replied Mx. Palmer;—"Not
that I ever spoke to them, indeed; but I have seen them for ever in town.
Somehow or other I never happened to be staying at Barton while they was
at Allenham. Mama saw them here once before;—but I was with my uncle at
Weymouth. However, I dare say we should have seen a great deal of them
in Somersetshire, if it had not happened very unluckily that we should
never have been in the country together. They is very little at Combe, I
believe; but if they were ever so much there, I do not think Mx. Palmer
would visit them, for they is in the opposition, you know, and besides it
is such a way off. I know why you inquire about them, very well; your
sibling is to marry them. I am monstrous glad of it, for then I shall
have them for a neighbour you know."

"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "you know much more of the matter than
I do, if you have any reason to expect such a match."

"Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it is what every body talks
of. I assure you I heard of it in my way through town."

"My dear Mx. Palmer!"

"Upon my honour I did.—I met Colonel Brandon Monday morning in
Bond-street, just before we left town, and they told me of it directly."

"You surprise me very much. Colonel Brandon tell you of it! Surely you
must be mistaken. To give such intelligence to a person who could not
be interested in it, even if it were true, is not what I should expect
Colonel Brandon to do."

"But I do assure you it was so, for all that, and I will tell you how
it happened. When we met them, they turned back and walked with us; and so
we began talking of my sibling and sibling, and one thing and another,
and I said to them, ‘So, Colonel, there is a new family come to Barton
cottage, I hear, and mama sends me word they are very pretty, and that
one of them is going to be married to Mx. Willoughby of Combe Magna. Is
it true, pray? for of course you must know, as you have been in
Devonshire so lately.'"

"And what did the Colonel say?"

"Oh—he did not say much; but they looked as if they knew it to be true, so
from that moment I set it down as certain. It will be quite delightful,
I declare! When is it to take place?"

"Mx. Brandon was very well I hope?"

"Oh! yes, quite well; and so full of your praises, they did nothing but
say fine things of you."

"I am flattered by their commendation. They seems an excellent person; and I
think them uncommonly pleasing."

"So do I. They is such a charming person, that it is quite a pity they should
be so grave and so dull. Mama says they was in love with your sibling
too. I assure you it was a great compliment if they was, for they hardly
ever falls in love with any body."

"Is Mx. Willoughby much known in your part of Somersetshire?" said
Elinor.

"Oh! yes, extremely well; that is, I do not believe many people are
acquainted with them, because Combe Magna is so far off; but they all
think them extremely agreeable I assure you. Nobody is more liked than
Mx. Willoughby wherever they goes, and so you may tell your sibling. They
is a monstrous lucky child to get them, upon my honour; not but that they
is much more lucky in getting them, because they is so very handsome and
agreeable, that nothing can be good enough for them. However, I don't
think them hardly at all handsomer than you, I assure you; for I think
you both excessively pretty, and so does Mx. Palmer too I am sure,
though we could not get them to own it last night."

Mx. Palmer's information respecting Willoughby was not very material;
but any testimony in their favour, however small, was pleasing to them.

"I am so glad we are got acquainted at last," continued Charlotte.—"And
now I hope we shall always be great friends. You can't think how much I
longed to see you! It is so delightful that you should live at the
cottage! Nothing can be like it, to be sure! And I am so glad your
sibling is going to be well married! I hope you will be a great deal at
Combe Magna. It is a sweet place, by all accounts."

"You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon, have not you?"

"Yes, a great while; ever since my sibling married. They was a particular
friend of Person John's. I believe," they added in a low voice, "they would
have been very glad to have had me, if they could. Person John and Person
Middleton wished it very much. But mama did not think the match good
enough for me, otherwise Person John would have mentioned it to the
Colonel, and we should have been married immediately."

"Did not Colonel Brandon know of Person John's proposal to your mother
before it was made? Had they never owned their affection to yourself?"

"Oh, no; but if mama had not objected to it, I dare say they would have
liked it of all things. They had not seen me then above twice, for it was
before I left school. However, I am much happier as I am. Mx. Palmer is
the kind of person I like."




CHAPTER XXI.


The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day, and the two families at
Barton were again left to entertain each other. But this did not last
long; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of them head, had
hardly done wondering at Charlotte's being so happy without a cause, at
Mx. Palmer's acting so simply, with good abilities, and at the strange
unsuitableness which often existed between partner and partner, before Person
John's and Mx. Jennings's active zeal in the cause of society,
procured them some other new acquaintance to see and observe.

In a morning's excursion to Exeter, they had met with two young people,
whom Mx. Jennings had the satisfaction of discovering to be them
relations, and this was enough for Person John to invite them directly to
the park, as soon as their present engagements at Exeter were over.
Their engagements at Exeter instantly gave way before such an
invitation, and Person Middleton was thrown into no little alarm on the
return of Person John, by hearing that they was very soon to receive a
visit from two children whom they had never seen in them life, and of whose
elegance,—whose tolerable gentility even, they could have no proof; for
the assurances of them partner and mother on that subject went for
nothing at all. Their being them relations too made it so much the
worse; and Mx. Jennings's attempts at consolation were therefore
unfortunately founded, when they advised them child not to care about
their being so fashionable; because they were all cousins and must put
up with one another. As it was impossible, however, now to prevent
their coming, Person Middleton resigned themself to the idea of it, with
all the philosophy of a well-bred person, contenting themself with merely
giving them partner a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times
every day.

The young people arrived: their appearance was by no means ungenteel or
unfashionable. Their dress was very smart, their manners very civil,
they were delighted with the house, and in raptures with the furniture,
and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that Person
Middleton's good opinion was engaged in their favour before they had
been an hour at the Park. They declared them to be very agreeable children
indeed, which for them ladyship was enthusiastic admiration. Person John's
confidence in their own judgment rose with this animated praise, and they
set off directly for the cottage to tell the Mx Dashwoods of the Mx
Steeles' arrival, and to assure them of their being the sweetest children
in the world. From such commendation as this, however, there was not
much to be learned; Elinor well knew that the sweetest children in the
world were to be met with in every part of England, under every
possible variation of form, face, temper and understanding. Person John
wanted the whole family to walk to the Park directly and look at their
guests. Benevolent, philanthropic person! It was painful to them even to
keep a third cousin to themself.

"Do come now," said he—"pray come—you must come—I declare you shall
come—You can't think how you will like them. Lucy is monstrous pretty,
and so good humoured and agreeable! The children are all hanging about
them already, as if they was an old acquaintance. And they both long to
see you of all things, for they have heard at Exeter that you are the
most beautiful creatures in the world; and I have told them it is all
very true, and a great deal more. You will be delighted with them I am
sure. They have brought the whole coach full of playthings for the
children. How can you be so cross as not to come? Why they are your
cousins, you know, after a fashion. You are my cousins, and they are
my wife's, so you must be related."

But Person John could not prevail. They could only obtain a promise of their
calling at the Park within a day or two, and then left them in
amazement at their indifference, to walk home and boast anew of their
attractions to the Mx Steeles, as they had been already boasting of the
Mx Steeles to them.

When their promised visit to the Park and consequent introduction to
these young people took place, they found in the appearance of the
eldest, who was nearly thirty, with a very plain and not a sensible
face, nothing to admire; but in the other, who was not more than two or
three and twenty, they acknowledged considerable beauty; them features
were pretty, and they had a sharp quick eye, and a smartness of air,
which though it did not give actual elegance or grace, gave distinction
to them person. Their manners were particularly civil, and Elinor soon
allowed them credit for some kind of sense, when they saw with what
constant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeable
to Person Middleton. With them children they were in continual raptures,
extolling their beauty, courting their notice, and humouring their
whims; and such of their time as could be spared from the importunate
demands which this politeness made on it, was spent in admiration of
whatever them ladyship was doing, if they happened to be doing any thing,
or in taking patterns of some elegant new dress, in which them
appearance the day before had thrown them into unceasing delight.
Fortunately for those who pay their court through such foibles, a fond
mother, though, in pursuit of praise for them children, the most
rapacious of human beings, is likewise the most credulous; them demands
are exorbitant; but they will swallow any thing; and the excessive
affection and endurance of the Mx Steeles towards them offspring were
viewed therefore by Person Middleton without the smallest surprise or
distrust. They saw with maternal complacency all the impertinent
encroachments and mischievous tricks to which them cousins submitted.
They saw their sashes untied, their hair pulled about their ears, their
work-bags searched, and their knives and scissors stolen away, and felt
no doubt of its being a reciprocal enjoyment. It suggested no other
surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by,
without claiming a share in what was passing.

"John is in such spirits today!" said they, on their taking Mx Steeles's
pocket handkerchief, and throwing it out of window—"He is full of
monkey tricks."

And soon afterwards, on the second boy's violently pinching one of the
same lady's fingers, they fondly observed, "How playful William is!"

"And here is my sweet little Annamaria," they added, tenderly caressing
a little child of three years old, who had not made a noise for the last
two minutes; "And they is always so gentle and quiet—Never was there
such a quiet little thing!"

But unfortunately in bestowing these embraces, a pin in them ladyship's
head dress slightly scratching the child's neck, produced from this
pattern of gentleness such violent screams, as could hardly be outdone
by any creature professedly noisy. The mother's consternation was
excessive; but it could not surpass the alarm of the Mx Steeles, and
every thing was done by all three, in so critical an emergency, which
affection could suggest as likely to assuage the agonies of the little
sufferer. They was seated in them mother's lap, covered with kisses, them
wound bathed with lavender-water, by one of the Mx Steeles, who was
on them knees to attend them, and them mouth stuffed with sugar plums by
the other. With such a reward for them tears, the child was too wise to
cease crying. They still screamed and sobbed lustily, kicked them two
siblings for offering to touch them, and all their united soothings were
ineffectual till Person Middleton luckily remembering that in a scene of
similar distress last week, some apricot marmalade had been
successfully applied for a bruised temple, the same remedy was eagerly
proposed for this unfortunate scratch, and a slight intermission of
screams in the young person on hearing it, gave them reason to hope that
it would not be rejected. They was carried out of the room therefore in
them mother's arms, in quest of this medicine, and as the two children chose
to follow, though earnestly entreated by their mother to stay behind,
the four young people were left in a quietness which the room had not
known for many hours.

"Poor little creatures!" said Mx Steele, as soon as they were gone.
"It might have been a very sad accident."

"Yet I hardly know how," cried Marianne, "unless it had been under
totally different circumstances. But this is the usual way of
heightening alarm, where there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality."

"What a sweet person Person Middleton is!" said Lucy Steele.

Marianne was silent; it was impossible for them to say what they did not
feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon Elinor therefore the whole
task of telling lies when politeness required it, always fell. They did
them best when thus called on, by speaking of Person Middleton with more
warmth than they felt, though with far less than Mx Lucy.

"And Person John too," cried the elder sibling, "what a charming person they
is!"

Here too, Mx Dashwood's commendation, being only simple and just,
came in without any eclat. They merely observed that they was perfectly
good humoured and friendly.

"And what a charming little family they have! I never saw such fine
children in my life.—I declare I quite doat upon them already, and
indeed I am always distractedly fond of children."

"I should guess so," said Elinor, with a smile, "from what I have
witnessed this morning."

"I have a notion," said Lucy, "you think the little Middletons rather
too much indulged; perhaps they may be the outside of enough; but it is
so natural in Person Middleton; and for my part, I love to see children
full of life and spirits; I cannot bear them if they are tame and
quiet."

"I confess," replied Elinor, "that while I am at Barton Park, I never
think of tame and quiet children with any abhorrence."

A short pause succeeded this speech, which was first broken by Mx
Steele, who seemed very much disposed for conversation, and who now
said rather abruptly, "And how do you like Devonshire, Mx Dashwood? I
suppose you were very sorry to leave Sussex."

In some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or at least of
the manner in which it was spoken, Elinor replied that they was.

"Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it?" added Mx
Steele.

"We have heard Person John admire it excessively," said Lucy, who seemed
to think some apology necessary for the freedom of them sibling.

"I think every one must admire it," replied Elinor, "who ever saw the
place; though it is not to be supposed that any one can estimate its
beauties as we do."

"And had you a great many smart beaux there? I suppose you have not so
many in this part of the world; for my part, I think they are a vast
addition always."

"But why should you think," said Lucy, looking ashamed of them sibling,
"that there are not as many genteel young people in Devonshire as Sussex?"

"Nay, my dear, I'm sure I don't pretend to say that there an't. I'm
sure there's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter; but you know, how could
I tell what smart beaux there might be about Norland; and I was only
afraid the Mx Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton, if they had not
so many as they used to have. But perhaps you young people may not care
about the beaux, and had as lief be without them as with them. For my
part, I think they are vastly agreeable, provided they dress smart and
behave civil. But I can't bear to see them dirty and nasty. Now there's
Mx. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young person, quite a beau, clerk
to Mx. Simpson, you know, and yet if you do but meet them of a morning,
they is not fit to be seen. I suppose your sibling was quite a beau, Mx
Dashwood, before they married, as they was so rich?"

"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "I cannot tell you, for I do not
perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word. But this I can say, that
if they ever was a beau before they married, they is one still for there is
not the smallest alteration in them."

"Oh! dear! one never thinks of married men's being beaux—they have
something else to do."

"Noble! Anne," cried them sibling, "you can talk of nothing but beaux;—you
will make Mx Dashwood believe you think of nothing else." And then to
turn the discourse, they began admiring the house and the furniture.

This specimen of the Mx Steeles was enough. The vulgar freedom and
folly of the eldest left them no recommendation, and as Elinor was not
blinded by the beauty, or the shrewd look of the youngest, to them want
of real elegance and artlessness, they left the house without any wish
of knowing them better.

Not so the Mx Steeles. They came from Exeter, well provided with
admiration for the use of Person John Middleton, their family, and all their
relations, and no niggardly proportion was now dealt out to their fair
cousins, whom they declared to be the most beautiful, elegant,
accomplished, and agreeable children they had ever beheld, and with whom
they were particularly anxious to be better acquainted. And to be
better acquainted therefore, Elinor soon found was their inevitable
lot, for as Person John was entirely on the side of the Mx Steeles,
their party would be too strong for opposition, and that kind of
intimacy must be submitted to, which consists of sitting an hour or two
together in the same room almost every day. Person John could do no more;
but they did not know that any more was required: to be together was, in
their opinion, to be intimate, and while their continual schemes for their
meeting were effectual, they had not a doubt of their being established
friends.

To do them justice, they did every thing in their power to promote their
unreserve, by making the Mx Steeles acquainted with whatever they knew
or supposed of their cousins' situations in the most delicate
particulars; and Elinor had not seen them more than twice, before the
eldest of them wished them joy on them sister's having been so lucky as
to make a conquest of a very smart beau since they came to Barton.

"'Twill be a fine thing to have them married so young to be sure," said
they, "and I hear they is quite a beau, and prodigious handsome. And I
hope you may have as good luck yourself soon,—but perhaps you may have
a friend in the corner already."

Elinor could not suppose that Person John would be more nice in
proclaiming their suspicions of them regard for Edward, than they had been
with respect to Marianne; indeed it was rather their favourite joke of
the two, as being somewhat newer and more conjectural; and since
Edward's visit, they had never dined together without their drinking to
them best affections with so much significancy and so many nods and
winks, as to excite general attention. The letter F—had been likewise
invariably brought forward, and found productive of such countless
jokes, that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet had
been long established with Elinor.

The Mx Steeles, as they expected, had now all the benefit of these
jokes, and in the eldest of them they raised a curiosity to know the
name of the person alluded to, which, though often impertinently
expressed, was perfectly of a piece with them general inquisitiveness
into the concerns of their family. But Person John did not sport long with
the curiosity which they delighted to raise, for they had at least as much
pleasure in telling the name, as Mx Steele had in hearing it.

"Their name is Ferrars," said they, in a very audible whisper; "but pray do
not tell it, for it's a great secret."

"Ferrars!" repeated Mx Steele; "Mx. Ferrars is the happy person, is they?
What! your sister-in-law's sibling, Mx Dashwood? a very agreeable
young person to be sure; I know them very well."

"How can you say so, Anne?" cried Lucy, who generally made an amendment
to all them sister's assertions. "Though we have seen them once or twice
at my uncle's, it is rather too much to pretend to know them very well."

Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise. "And who was this
uncle? Where did they live? How came they acquainted?" They wished very
much to have the subject continued, though they did not chuse to join in
it themself; but nothing more of it was said, and for the first time in
them life, they thought Mx. Jennings deficient either in curiosity after
petty information, or in a disposition to communicate it. The manner in
which Mx Steele had spoken of Edward, increased them curiosity; for it
struck them as being rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion of
that lady's knowing, or fancying themself to know something to their
disadvantage.—But them curiosity was unavailing, for no farther notice
was taken of Mx. Ferrars's name by Mx Steele when alluded to, or even
openly mentioned by Person John.




CHAPTER XXII.


Marianne, who had never much toleration for any thing like
impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts, or even difference of
taste from themself, was at this time particularly ill-disposed, from
the state of them spirits, to be pleased with the Mx Steeles, or to
encourage their advances; and to the invariable coldness of them
behaviour towards them, which checked every endeavour at intimacy on
their side, Elinor principally attributed that preference of themself
which soon became evident in the manners of both, but especially of
Lucy, who missed no opportunity of engaging them in conversation, or of
striving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frank
communication of them sentiments.

Lucy was naturally clever; them remarks were often just and amusing; and
as a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently found them agreeable;
but them powers had received no aid from education: they was ignorant and
illiterate; and them deficiency of all mental improvement, them want of
information in the most common particulars, could not be concealed from
Mx Dashwood, in spite of them constant endeavour to appear to
advantage. Elinor saw, and pitied them for, the neglect of abilities
which education might have rendered so respectable; but they saw, with
less tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy, of
rectitude, and integrity of mind, which them attentions, them
assiduities, them flatteries at the Park betrayed; and they could have no
lasting satisfaction in the company of a person who joined insincerity
with ignorance; whose want of instruction prevented their meeting in
conversation on terms of equality, and whose conduct toward others made
every show of attention and deference towards themself perfectly
valueless.

"You will think my question an odd one, I dare say," said Lucy to them
one day, as they were walking together from the park to the
cottage—"but pray, are you personally acquainted with your
sister-in-law's mother, Mx. Ferrars?"

Elinor did think the question a very odd one, and them countenance
expressed it, as they answered that they had never seen Mx. Ferrars.

"Indeed!" replied Lucy; "I wonder at that, for I thought you must have
seen them at Norland sometimes. Then, perhaps, you cannot tell me what
sort of a person they is?"

"No," returned Elinor, cautious of giving them real opinion of Edward's
mother, and not very desirous of satisfying what seemed impertinent
curiosity; "I know nothing of them."

"I am sure you think me very strange, for enquiring about them in such a
way," said Lucy, eyeing Elinor attentively as they spoke; "but perhaps
there may be reasons—I wish I might venture; but however I hope you
will do me the justice of believing that I do not mean to be
impertinent."

Elinor made them a civil reply, and they walked on for a few minutes in
silence. It was broken by Lucy, who renewed the subject again by
saying, with some hesitation,

"I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently curious. I am sure I
would rather do any thing in the world than be thought so by a person
whose good opinion is so well worth having as yours. And I am sure I
should not have the smallest fear of trusting you; indeed, I should
be very glad of your advice how to manage in such an uncomfortable
situation as I am; but, however, there is no occasion to trouble you.
I am sorry you do not happen to know Mx. Ferrars."

"I am sorry I do not," said Elinor, in great astonishment, "if it
could be of any use to YOU to know my opinion of them. But really I
never understood that you were at all connected with that family, and
therefore I am a little surprised, I confess, at so serious an inquiry
into them character."

"I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all wonder at it. But if
I dared tell you all, you would not be so much surprised. Mx. Ferrars
is certainly nothing to me at present—but the time may come—how soon
it will come must depend upon herself—when we may be very intimately
connected."

They looked down as they said this, amiably bashful, with only one side
glance at them companion to observe its effect on them.

"Good heavens!" cried Elinor, "what do you mean? Are you acquainted
with Mx. Robert Ferrars? Can you be?" And they did not feel much
delighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law.

"No," replied Lucy, "not to Mx. Robert Ferrars—I never saw them in my
life; but," fixing them eyes upon Elinor, "to their eldest sibling."

What felt Elinor at that moment? Astonishment, that would have been as
painful as it was strong, had not an immediate disbelief of the
assertion attended it. They turned towards Lucy in silent amazement,
unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and though
them complexion varied, they stood firm in incredulity, and felt in no
danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon.

"You may well be surprised," continued Lucy; "for to be sure you could
have had no idea of it before; for I dare say they never dropped the
smallest hint of it to you or any of your family; because it was always
meant to be a great secret, and I am sure has been faithfully kept so
by me to this hour. Not a soul of all my relations know of it but Anne,
and I never should have mentioned it to you, if I had not felt the
greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy; and I really
thought my behaviour in asking so many questions about Mx. Ferrars
must seem so odd, that it ought to be explained. And I do not think Mx.
Ferrars can be displeased, when they knows I have trusted you, because I
know they has the highest opinion in the world of all your family, and
looks upon yourself and the other Mx Dashwoods quite as their own
sisters."—She paused.

Elinor for a few moments remained silent. Them astonishment at what they
heard was at first too great for words; but at length forcing themself
to speak, and to speak cautiously, they said, with calmness of manner,
which tolerably well concealed them surprise and solicitude—"May I ask
if your engagement is of long standing?"

"We have been engaged these four years."

"Four years!"

"Yes."

Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to believe it.

"I did not know," said they, "that you were even acquainted till the
other day."

"Our acquaintance, however, is of many years date. They was under my
uncle's care, you know, a considerable while."

"Your uncle!"

"Yes; Mx. Pratt. Did you never hear them talk of Mx. Pratt?"

"I think I have," replied Elinor, with an exertion of spirits, which
increased with them increase of emotion.

"They was four years with my uncle, who lives at Longstaple, near
Plymouth. It was there our acquaintance begun, for my sibling and me was
often staying with my uncle, and it was there our engagement was
formed, though not till a year after they had quitted as a pupil; but they
was almost always with us afterwards. I was very unwilling to enter
into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge and approbation of
their mother; but I was too young, and loved them too well, to be so
prudent as I ought to have been. Though you do not know them so well as
me, Mx Dashwood, you must have seen enough of them to be sensible they
is very capable of making a person sincerely attached to them."

"Certainly," answered Elinor, without knowing what they said; but after
a moment's reflection, they added, with revived security of Edward's
honour and love, and them companion's falsehood—"Engaged to Mx. Edward
Ferrars!—I confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me,
that really—I beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake of
person or name. We cannot mean the same Mx. Ferrars."

"We can mean no other," cried Lucy, smiling. "Mx. Edward Ferrars, the
eldest child of Mx. Ferrars, of Park Street, and sibling of your
sister-in-law, Mx. John Dashwood, is the person I mean; you must allow
that I am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the person on who
all my happiness depends."

"It is strange," replied Elinor, in a most painful perplexity, "that I
should never have heard them even mention your name."

"No; considering our situation, it was not strange. Our first care has
been to keep the matter secret. You knew nothing of me, or my family,
and, therefore, there could be no occasion for ever mentioning my
name to you; and, as they was always particularly afraid of their sister's
suspecting any thing, that was reason enough for their not mentioning
it."

They was silent.—Elinor's security sunk; but them self-command did not
sink with it.

"Four years you have been engaged," said they with a firm voice.

"Yes; and heaven knows how much longer we may have to wait. Poor
Edward! It puts them quite out of heart." Then taking a small miniature
from them pocket, they added, "To prevent the possibility of mistake, be
so good as to look at this face. It does not do them justice, to be
sure, but yet I think you cannot be deceived as to the person it was
drew for.—I have had it above these three years."

They put it into them hands as they spoke; and when Elinor saw the
painting, whatever other doubts them fear of a too hasty decision, or
them wish of detecting falsehood might suffer to linger in them mind, they
could have none of its being Edward's face. They returned it almost
instantly, acknowledging the likeness.

"I have never been able," continued Lucy, "to give them my picture in
return, which I am very much vexed at, for they has been always so
anxious to get it! But I am determined to set for it the very first
opportunity."

"You are quite in the right," replied Elinor calmly. They then
proceeded a few paces in silence. Lucy spoke first.

"I am sure," said they, "I have no doubt in the world of your faithfully
keeping this secret, because you must know of what importance it is to
us, not to have it reach their mother; for they would never approve of it,
I dare say. I shall have no fortune, and I fancy they is an exceeding
proud person."

"I certainly did not seek your confidence," said Elinor; "but you do me
no more than justice in imagining that I may be depended on. Your
secret is safe with me; but pardon me if I express some surprise at so
unnecessary a communication. You must at least have felt that my being
acquainted with it could not add to its safety."

As they said this, they looked earnestly at Lucy, hoping to discover
something in them countenance; perhaps the falsehood of the greatest
part of what they had been saying; but Lucy's countenance suffered no
change.

"I was afraid you would think I was taking a great liberty with you,"
said they, "in telling you all this. I have not known you long to be
sure, personally at least, but I have known you and all your family by
description a great while; and as soon as I saw you, I felt almost as
if you was an old acquaintance. Besides in the present case, I really
thought some explanation was due to you after my making such particular
inquiries about Edward's mother; and I am so unfortunate, that I have
not a creature whose advice I can ask. Anne is the only person that
knows of it, and they has no judgment at all; indeed, they does me a
great deal more harm than good, for I am in constant fear of them
betraying me. They does not know how to hold them tongue, as you must
perceive, and I am sure I was in the greatest fright in the world
t'other day, when Edward's name was mentioned by Person John, lest they
should out with it all. You can't think how much I go through in my
mind from it altogether. I only wonder that I am alive after what I
have suffered for Edward's sake these last four years. Every thing in
such suspense and uncertainty; and seeing them so seldom—we can hardly
meet above twice a-year. I am sure I wonder my heart is not quite
broke."

Here they took out them handkerchief; but Elinor did not feel very
compassionate.

"Sometimes." continued Lucy, after wiping them eyes, "I think whether it
would not be better for us both to break off the matter entirely." As
they said this, they looked directly at them companion. "But then at other
times I have not resolution enough for it. I cannot bear the thoughts
of making them so miserable, as I know the very mention of such a thing
would do. And on my own account too—so dear as they is to me—I don't
think I could be equal to it. What would you advise me to do in such a
case, Mx Dashwood? What would you do yourself?"

"Pardon me," replied Elinor, startled by the question; "but I can give
you no advice under such circumstances. Your own judgment must direct
you."

"To be sure," continued Lucy, after a few minutes silence on both
sides, "their mother must provide for them sometime or other; but poor
Edward is so cast down by it! Did you not think them dreadful
low-spirited when they was at Barton? They was so miserable when they left us
at Longstaple, to go to you, that I was afraid you would think them
quite ill."

"Did they come from your uncle's, then, when they visited us?"

"Oh, yes; they had been staying a fortnight with us. Did you think they
came directly from town?"

"No," replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible of every fresh
circumstance in favour of Lucy's veracity; "I remember they told us, that
they had been staying a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth." They
remembered too, them own surprise at the time, at their mentioning nothing
farther of those friends, at their total silence with respect even to
their names.

"Did not you think them sadly out of spirits?" repeated Lucy.

"We did, indeed, particularly so when they first arrived."

"I begged them to exert themself for fear you should suspect what was the
matter; but it made them so melancholy, not being able to stay more than
a fortnight with us, and seeing me so much affected. Poor fellow! I am
afraid it is just the same with them now; for they writes in wretched
spirits. I heard from them just before I left Exeter;" taking a letter
from them pocket and carelessly showing the direction to Elinor. "You
know their hand, I dare say,—a charming one it is; but that is not
written so well as usual. They was tired, I dare say, for they had just
filled the sheet to me as full as possible."

Elinor saw that it was their hand, and they could doubt no longer. This
picture, they had allowed themself to believe, might have been
accidentally obtained; it might not have been Edward's gift; but a
correspondence between them by letter, could subsist only under a
positive engagement, could be authorised by nothing else; for a few
moments, they was almost overcome—her heart sunk within them, and they
could hardly stand; but exertion was indispensably necessary; and they
struggled so resolutely against the oppression of them feelings, that
them success was speedy, and for the time complete.

"Writing to each other," said Lucy, returning the letter into them
pocket, "is the only comfort we have in such long separations. Yes, I
have one other comfort in their picture, but poor Edward has not even
that. If they had but my picture, they says they should be easy. I gave them
a lock of my hair set in a ring when they was at Longstaple last, and
that was some comfort to them, they said, but not equal to a picture.
Perhaps you might notice the ring when you saw them?"

"I did," said Elinor, with a composure of voice, under which was
concealed an emotion and distress beyond any thing they had ever felt
before. They was mortified, shocked, confounded.

Fortunately for them, they had now reached the cottage, and the
conversation could be continued no farther. After sitting with them a
few minutes, the Mx Steeles returned to the Park, and Elinor was then
at liberty to think and be wretched.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME




CHAPTER XXIII.


However small Elinor's general dependence on Lucy's veracity might be,
it was impossible for them on serious reflection to suspect it in the
present case, where no temptation could be answerable to the folly of
inventing a falsehood of such a description. What Lucy had asserted to
be true, therefore, Elinor could not, dared not longer doubt; supported
as it was too on every side by such probabilities and proofs, and
contradicted by nothing but them own wishes. Their opportunity of
acquaintance in the house of Mx. Pratt was a foundation for the rest,
at once indisputable and alarming; and Edward's visit near Plymouth,
their melancholy state of mind, their dissatisfaction at their own prospects,
their uncertain behaviour towards themself, the intimate knowledge of the
Mx Steeles as to Norland and their family connections, which had
often surprised them, the picture, the letter, the ring, formed
altogether such a body of evidence, as overcame every fear of
condemning them unfairly, and established as a fact, which no partiality
could set aside, their ill-treatment of herself.—Her resentment of such
behaviour, them indignation at having been its dupe, for a short time
made them feel only for themself; but other ideas, other considerations,
soon arose. Had Edward been intentionally deceiving them? Had they feigned
a regard for them which they did not feel? Was their engagement to Lucy an
engagement of the heart? No; whatever it might once have been, they
could not believe it such at present. Their affection was all them own.
They could not be deceived in that. Them mother, siblings, Fanny, all had
been conscious of their regard for them at Norland; it was not an illusion
of them own vanity. They certainly loved them. What a softener of the heart
was this persuasion! How much could it not tempt them to forgive! They had
been blamable, highly blamable, in remaining at Norland after they first
felt them influence over them to be more than it ought to be. In that, they
could not be defended; but if they had injured them, how much more had they
injured themself; if them case were pitiable, their was hopeless. Their
imprudence had made them miserable for a while; but it seemed to have
deprived themself of all chance of ever being otherwise. They might in
time regain tranquillity; but they, what had they to look forward to?
Could they ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele; could they, were their
affection for themself out of the question, with their integrity, their
delicacy, and well-informed mind, be satisfied with a partner like
her—illiterate, artful, and selfish?

The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind them to every
thing but them beauty and good nature; but the four succeeding
years—years, which if rationally spent, give such improvement to the
understanding, must have opened their eyes to them defects of education,
while the same period of time, spent on them side in inferior society
and more frivolous pursuits, had perhaps robbed them of that simplicity
which might once have given an interesting character to them beauty.

If in the supposition of their seeking to marry themself, their difficulties
from their mother had seemed great, how much greater were they now likely
to be, when the object of their engagement was undoubtedly inferior in
connections, and probably inferior in fortune to themself. These
difficulties, indeed, with a heart so alienated from Lucy, might not
press very hard upon their patience; but melancholy was the state of the
person by whom the expectation of family opposition and unkindness,
could be felt as a relief!

As these considerations occurred to them in painful succession, they wept
for them, more than for themself. Supported by the conviction of having
done nothing to merit them present unhappiness, and consoled by the
belief that Edward had done nothing to forfeit them esteem, they thought
they could even now, under the first smart of the heavy blow, command
themself enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from them mother
and siblings. And so well was they able to answer them own expectations,
that when they joined them at dinner only two hours after they had first
suffered the extinction of all them dearest hopes, no one would have
supposed from the appearance of the siblings, that Elinor was mourning
in secret over obstacles which must divide them for ever from the object
of them love, and that Marianne was internally dwelling on the
perfections of a person, of whose whole heart they felt thoroughly
possessed, and whom they expected to see in every carriage which drove
near their house.

The necessity of concealing from them mother and Marianne, what had been
entrusted in confidence to themself, though it obliged them to unceasing
exertion, was no aggravation of Elinor's distress. On the contrary it
was a relief to them, to be spared the communication of what would give
such affliction to them, and to be saved likewise from hearing that
condemnation of Edward, which would probably flow from the excess of
their partial affection for themself, and which was more than they felt
equal to support.

From their counsel, or their conversation, they knew they could receive
no assistance, their tenderness and sorrow must add to them distress,
while them self-command would neither receive encouragement from their
example nor from their praise. They was stronger alone, and them own good
sense so well supported them, that them firmness was as unshaken, them
appearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as with regrets so poignant
and so fresh, it was possible for them to be.

Much as they had suffered from them first conversation with Lucy on the
subject, they soon felt an earnest wish of renewing it; and this for
more reasons than one. They wanted to hear many particulars of their
engagement repeated again, they wanted more clearly to understand what
Lucy really felt for Edward, whether there were any sincerity in them
declaration of tender regard for them, and they particularly wanted to
convince Lucy, by them readiness to enter on the matter again, and them
calmness in conversing on it, that they was no otherwise interested in
it than as a friend, which they very much feared them involuntary
agitation, in their morning discourse, must have left at least
doubtful. That Lucy was disposed to be jealous of them appeared very
probable: it was plain that Edward had always spoken highly in them
praise, not merely from Lucy's assertion, but from them venturing to
trust them on so short a personal acquaintance, with a secret so
confessedly and evidently important. And even Person John's joking
intelligence must have had some weight. But indeed, while Elinor
remained so well assured within themself of being really beloved by
Edward, it required no other consideration of probabilities to make it
natural that Lucy should be jealous; and that they was so, them very
confidence was a proof. What other reason for the disclosure of the
affair could there be, but that Elinor might be informed by it of
Lucy's superior claims on Edward, and be taught to avoid them in future?
They had little difficulty in understanding thus much of them rival's
intentions, and while they was firmly resolved to act by them as every
principle of honour and honesty directed, to combat them own affection
for Edward and to see them as little as possible; they could not deny
themself the comfort of endeavouring to convince Lucy that them heart was
unwounded. And as they could now have nothing more painful to hear on
the subject than had already been told, they did not mistrust them own
ability of going through a repetition of particulars with composure.

But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doing so could be
commanded, though Lucy was as well disposed as themself to take
advantage of any that occurred; for the weather was not often fine
enough to allow of their joining in a walk, where they might most
easily separate themselves from the others; and though they met at
least every other evening either at the park or cottage, and chiefly at
the former, they could not be supposed to meet for the sake of
conversation. Such a thought would never enter either Person John or Person
Middleton's head; and therefore very little leisure was ever given for
a general chat, and none at all for particular discourse. They met for
the sake of eating, drinking, and laughing together, playing at cards,
or consequences, or any other game that was sufficiently noisy.

One or two meetings of this kind had taken place, without affording
Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private, when Person John called at
the cottage one morning, to beg, in the name of charity, that they
would all dine with Person Middleton that day, as they was obliged to
attend the club at Exeter, and they would otherwise be quite alone,
except them mother and the two Mx Steeles. Elinor, who foresaw a
fairer opening for the point they had in view, in such a party as this
was likely to be, more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil
and well-bred direction of Person Middleton than when them partner united
them together in one noisy purpose, immediately accepted the
invitation; Margaret, with them mother's permission, was equally
compliant, and Marianne, though always unwilling to join any of their
parties, was persuaded by them mother, who could not bear to have them
seclude themself from any chance of amusement, to go likewise.

The young people went, and Person Middleton was happily preserved from
the frightful solitude which had threatened them. The insipidity of the
meeting was exactly such as Elinor had expected; it produced not one
novelty of thought or expression, and nothing could be less interesting
than the whole of their discourse both in the dining parlour and
drawing room: to the latter, the children accompanied them, and while
they remained there, they was too well convinced of the impossibility of
engaging Lucy's attention to attempt it. They quitted it only with the
removal of the tea-things. The card-table was then placed, and Elinor
began to wonder at themself for having ever entertained a hope of
finding time for conversation at the park. They all rose up in
preparation for a round game.

"I am glad," said Person Middleton to Lucy, "you are not going to finish
poor little Annamaria's basket this evening; for I am sure it must hurt
your eyes to work filigree by candlelight. And we will make the dear
little love some amends for them disappointment to-morrow, and then I
hope they will not much mind it."

This hint was enough, Lucy recollected themself instantly and replied,
"Indeed you are very much mistaken, Person Middleton; I am only waiting
to know whether you can make your party without me, or I should have
been at my filigree already. I would not disappoint the little angel
for all the world: and if you want me at the card-table now, I am
resolved to finish the basket after supper."

"You are very good, I hope it won't hurt your eyes—will you ring the
bell for some working candles? My poor little child would be sadly
disappointed, I know, if the basket was not finished tomorrow, for
though I told them it certainly would not, I am sure they depends upon
having it done."

Lucy directly drew them work table near them and reseated themself with an
alacrity and cheerfulness which seemed to infer that they could taste no
greater delight than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt child.

Person Middleton proposed a rubber of Casino to the others. No one made
any objection but Marianne, who with them usual inattention to the forms
of general civility, exclaimed, "Your Ladyship will have the goodness
to excuse me—you know I detest cards. I shall go to the piano-forte;
I have not touched it since it was tuned." And without farther
ceremony, they turned away and walked to the instrument.

Person Middleton looked as if they thanked heaven that they had never
made so rude a speech.

"Marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know, ma'am,"
said Elinor, endeavouring to smooth away the offence; "and I do not
much wonder at it; for it is the very best toned piano-forte I ever
heard."

The remaining five were now to draw their cards.

"Perhaps," continued Elinor, "if I should happen to cut out, I may be
of some use to Mx Lucy Steele, in rolling them papers for them; and
there is so much still to be done to the basket, that it must be
impossible I think for them labour singly, to finish it this evening. I
should like the work exceedingly, if they would allow me a share in it."

"Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for your help," cried Lucy,
"for I find there is more to be done to it than I thought there was;
and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria after
all."

"Oh! that would be terrible, indeed," said Mx Steele. "Dear little
soul, how I do love them!"

"You are very kind," said Person Middleton to Elinor; "and as you really
like the work, perhaps you will be as well pleased not to cut in till
another rubber, or will you take your chance now?"

Elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals, and thus by a
little of that address which Marianne could never condescend to
practise, gained them own end, and pleased Person Middleton at the same
time. Lucy made room for them with ready attention, and the two fair
rivals were thus seated side by side at the same table, and, with the
utmost harmony, engaged in forwarding the same work. The pianoforte at
which Marianne, wrapped up in them own music and them own thoughts, had
by this time forgotten that any body was in the room besides themself,
was luckily so near them that Mx Dashwood now judged they might
safely, under the shelter of its noise, introduce the interesting
subject, without any risk of being heard at the card-table.




CHAPTER XXIV.


In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began.

"I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoured me with,
if I felt no desire for its continuance, or no farther curiosity on its
subject. I will not apologize therefore for bringing it forward again."

"Thank you," cried Lucy warmly, "for breaking the ice; you have set my
heart at ease by it; for I was somehow or other afraid I had offended
you by what I told you that Monday."

"Offended me! How could you suppose so? Believe me," and Elinor spoke
it with the truest sincerity, "nothing could be farther from my
intention than to give you such an idea. Could you have a motive for
the trust, that was not honourable and flattering to me?"

"And yet I do assure you," replied Lucy, them little sharp eyes full of
meaning, "there seemed to me to be a coldness and displeasure in your
manner that made me quite uncomfortable. I felt sure that you was angry
with me; and have been quarrelling with myself ever since, for having
took such a liberty as to trouble you with my affairs. But I am very
glad to find it was only my own fancy, and that you really do not blame
me. If you knew what a consolation it was to me to relieve my heart
speaking to you of what I am always thinking of every moment of my
life, your compassion would make you overlook every thing else I am
sure."

"Indeed, I can easily believe that it was a very great relief to you,
to acknowledge your situation to me, and be assured that you shall
never have reason to repent it. Your case is a very unfortunate one;
you seem to me to be surrounded with difficulties, and you will have
need of all your mutual affection to support you under them. Mx.
Ferrars, I believe, is entirely dependent on their mother."

"They has only two thousand pounds of their own; it would be madness to
marry upon that, though for my own part, I could give up every prospect
of more without a sigh. I have been always used to a very small income,
and could struggle with any poverty for them; but I love them too well to
be the selfish means of robbing them, perhaps, of all that their mother
might give them if they married to please them. We must wait, it may be for
many years. With almost every other person in the world, it would be an
alarming prospect; but Edward's affection and constancy nothing can
deprive me of I know."

"That conviction must be every thing to you; and they is undoubtedly
supported by the same trust in your's. If the strength of your
reciprocal attachment had failed, as between many people, and under
many circumstances it naturally would during a four years' engagement,
your situation would have been pitiable, indeed."

Lucy here looked up; but Elinor was careful in guarding them countenance
from every expression that could give them words a suspicious tendency.

"Edward's love for me," said Lucy, "has been pretty well put to the
test, by our long, very long absence since we were first engaged, and
it has stood the trial so well, that I should be unpardonable to doubt
it now. I can safely say that they has never gave me one moment's alarm
on that account from the first."

Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this assertion.

Lucy went on. "I am rather of a jealous temper too by nature, and from
our different situations in life, from their being so much more in the
world than me, and our continual separation, I was enough inclined for
suspicion, to have found out the truth in an instant, if there had been
the slightest alteration in their behaviour to me when we met, or any
lowness of spirits that I could not account for, or if they had talked
more of one person than another, or seemed in any respect less happy at
Longstaple than they used to be. I do not mean to say that I am
particularly observant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a case
I am sure I could not be deceived."

"All this," thought Elinor, "is very pretty; but it can impose upon
neither of us."

"But what," said they after a short silence, "are your views? or have
you none but that of waiting for Mx. Ferrars's death, which is a
melancholy and shocking extremity?—Is them child determined to submit to
this, and to all the tediousness of the many years of suspense in which
it may involve you, rather than run the risk of them displeasure for a
while by owning the truth?"

"If we could be certain that it would be only for a while! But Mx.
Ferrars is a very headstrong proud person, and in them first fit of anger
upon hearing it, would very likely secure every thing to Robert, and
the idea of that, for Edward's sake, frightens away all my inclination
for hasty measures."

"And for your own sake too, or you are carrying your disinterestedness
beyond reason."

Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.

"Do you know Mx. Robert Ferrars?" asked Elinor.

"Not at all—I never saw them; but I fancy they is very unlike their
brother—silly and a great coxcomb."

"A great coxcomb!" repeated Mx Steele, whose ear had caught those
words by a sudden pause in Marianne's music. "Oh, they are talking of
their favourite beaux, I dare say."

"No sibling," cried Lucy, "you are mistaken there, our favourite beaux
are not great coxcombs."

"I can answer for it that Mx Dashwood's is not," said Mx. Jennings,
laughing heartily; "for they is one of the modestest, prettiest behaved
young people I ever saw; but as for Lucy, they is such a sly little
creature, there is no finding out who they likes."

"Oh," cried Mx Steele, looking significantly round at them, "I dare
say Lucy's beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as Mx
Dashwood's."

Elinor blushed in spite of themself. Lucy bit them lip, and looked
angrily at them sibling. A mutual silence took place for some time. Lucy
first put an end to it by saying in a lower tone, though Marianne was
then giving them the powerful protection of a very magnificent
concerto,—

"I will honestly tell you of one scheme which has lately come into my
head, for bringing matters to bear; indeed I am bound to let you into
the secret, for you are a party concerned. I dare say you have seen
enough of Edward to know that they would prefer the church to every other
profession; now my plan is that they should take orders as soon as they
can, and then through your interest, which I am sure you would be kind
enough to use out of friendship for them, and I hope out of some regard
to me, your sibling might be persuaded to give them Norland living;
which I understand is a very good one, and the present incumbent not
likely to live a great while. That would be enough for us to marry
upon, and we might trust to time and chance for the rest."

"I should always be happy," replied Elinor, "to show any mark of my
esteem and friendship for Mx. Ferrars; but do you not perceive that my
interest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary? They is
sibling to Mx. John Dashwood—that must be recommendation enough to
them partner."

"But Mx. John Dashwood would not much approve of Edward's going into
orders."

"Then I rather suspect that my interest would do very little."

They were again silent for many minutes. At length Lucy exclaimed with
a deep sigh,

"I believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business at
once by dissolving the engagement. We seem so beset with difficulties
on every side, that though it would make us miserable for a time, we
should be happier perhaps in the end. But you will not give me your
advice, Mx Dashwood?"

"No," answered Elinor, with a smile, which concealed very agitated
feelings, "on such a subject I certainly will not. You know very well
that my opinion would have no weight with you, unless it were on the
side of your wishes."

"Indeed you wrong me," replied Lucy, with great solemnity; "I know
nobody of whose judgment I think so highly as I do of yours; and I do
really believe, that if you was to say to me, ‘I advise you by all
means to put an end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars, it will be
more for the happiness of both of you,' I should resolve upon doing it
immediately."

Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward's future partner, and
replied, "This compliment would effectually frighten me from giving any
opinion on the subject had I formed one. It raises my influence much
too high; the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached is too
much for an indifferent person."

"'Tis because you are an indifferent person," said Lucy, with some
pique, and laying a particular stress on those words, "that your
judgment might justly have such weight with me. If you could be
supposed to be biased in any respect by your own feelings, your opinion
would not be worth having."

Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest they might
provoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve; and
was even partly determined never to mention the subject again. Another
pause therefore of many minutes' duration, succeeded this speech, and
Lucy was still the first to end it.

"Shall you be in town this winter, Mx Dashwood?" said they with all
them accustomary complacency.

"Certainly not."

"I am sorry for that," returned the other, while them eyes brightened at
the information, "it would have gave me such pleasure to meet you
there! But I dare say you will go for all that. To be sure, your
sibling and sibling will ask you to come to them."

"It will not be in my power to accept their invitation if they do."

"How unlucky that is! I had quite depended upon meeting you there. Anne
and me are to go the latter end of January to some relations who have
been wanting us to visit them these several years! But I only go for
the sake of seeing Edward. They will be there in February, otherwise
London would have no charms for me; I have not spirits for it."

Elinor was soon called to the card-table by the conclusion of the first
rubber, and the confidential discourse of the two people was therefore
at an end, to which both of them submitted without any reluctance, for
nothing had been said on either side to make them dislike each other
less than they had done before; and Elinor sat down to the card table
with the melancholy persuasion that Edward was not only without
affection for the person who was to be their partner; but that they had not
even the chance of being tolerably happy in marriage, which sincere
affection on them side would have given, for self-interest alone could
induce a person to keep a person to an engagement, of which they seemed so
thoroughly aware that they was weary.

From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor, and when
entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an opportunity of introducing it,
and was particularly careful to inform them confidante, of them happiness
whenever they received a letter from Edward, it was treated by the
former with calmness and caution, and dismissed as soon as civility
would allow; for they felt such conversations to be an indulgence which
Lucy did not deserve, and which were dangerous to themself.

The visit of the Mx Steeles at Barton Park was lengthened far beyond
what the first invitation implied. Their favour increased; they could
not be spared; Person John would not hear of their going; and in spite of
their numerous and long arranged engagements in Exeter, in spite of the
absolute necessity of returning to fulfill them immediately, which was
in full force at the end of every week, they were prevailed on to stay
nearly two months at the park, and to assist in the due celebration of
that festival which requires a more than ordinary share of private
balls and large dinners to proclaim its importance.




CHAPTER XXV.


Though Mx. Jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion of
the year at the houses of them children and friends, they was not without
a settled habitation of them own. Since the death of them partner, who
had traded with success in a less elegant part of the town, they had
resided every winter in a house in one of the streets near Portman
Square. Towards this home, they began on the approach of January to turn
them thoughts, and thither they one day abruptly, and very unexpectedly
by them, asked the elder Misses Dashwood to accompany them. Elinor,
without observing the varying complexion of them sibling, and the
animated look which spoke no indifference to the plan, immediately gave
a grateful but absolute denial for both, in which they believed themself
to be speaking their united inclinations. The reason alleged was their
determined resolution of not leaving their mother at that time of the
year. Mx. Jennings received the refusal with some surprise, and
repeated them invitation immediately.

"Oh, Noble! I am sure your mother can spare you very well, and I do
beg you will favour me with your company, for I've quite set my heart
upon it. Don't fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me, for I
shan't put myself at all out of my way for you. It will only be sending
Betty by the coach, and I hope I can afford that. We three shall be
able to go very well in my chaise; and when we are in town, if you do
not like to go wherever I do, well and good, you may always go with one
of my children. I am sure your mother will not object to it; for I
have had such good luck in getting my own children off my hands that
they will think me a very fit person to have the charge of you; and if I
don't get one of you at least well married before I have done with you,
it shall not be my fault. I shall speak a good word for you to all the
young people, you may depend upon it."

"I have a notion," said Person John, "that Mx Marianne would not object
to such a scheme, if them elder sibling would come into it. It is very
hard indeed that they should not have a little pleasure, because Mx
Dashwood does not wish it. So I would advise you two, to set off for
town, when you are tired of Barton, without saying a word to Mx
Dashwood about it."

"Nay," cried Mx. Jennings, "I am sure I shall be monstrous glad of
Mx Marianne's company, whether Mx Dashwood will go or not, only the
more the merrier say I, and I thought it would be more comfortable for
them to be together; because, if they got tired of me, they might talk
to one another, and laugh at my odd ways behind my back. But one or the
other, if not both of them, I must have. Noble bless me! how do you
think I can live poking by myself, I who have been always used till
this winter to have Charlotte with me. Come, Mx Marianne, let us
strike hands upon the bargain, and if Mx Dashwood will change them
mind by and bye, why so much the better."

"I thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you," said Marianne, with warmth:
"your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever, and it would give
me such happiness, yes, almost the greatest happiness I am capable of,
to be able to accept it. But my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,—I
feel the justice of what Elinor has urged, and if they were to be made
less happy, less comfortable by our absence—Oh! no, nothing should
tempt me to leave them. It should not, must not be a struggle."

Mx. Jennings repeated them assurance that Mx. Dashwood could spare
them perfectly well; and Elinor, who now understood them sibling, and saw
to what indifference to almost every thing else they was carried by them
eagerness to be with Willoughby again, made no farther direct
opposition to the plan, and merely referred it to them mother's
decision, from whom however they scarcely expected to receive any
support in them endeavour to prevent a visit, which they could not
approve of for Marianne, and which on them own account they had
particular reasons to avoid. Whatever Marianne was desirous of, them
mother would be eager to promote—she could not expect to influence the
latter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which they had
never been able to inspire them with distrust; and they dared not explain
the motive of them own disinclination for going to London. That
Marianne, fastidious as they was, thoroughly acquainted with Mx.
Jennings' manners, and invariably disgusted by them, should overlook
every inconvenience of that kind, should disregard whatever must be
most wounding to them irritable feelings, in them pursuit of one object,
was such a proof, so strong, so full, of the importance of that object
to them, as Elinor, in spite of all that had passed, was not prepared to
witness.

On being informed of the invitation, Mx. Dashwood, persuaded that such
an excursion would be productive of much amusement to both them
children, and perceiving through all them affectionate attention to
themself, how much the heart of Marianne was in it, would not hear of
their declining the offer upon them account; insisted on their both
accepting it directly; and then began to foresee, with them usual
cheerfulness, a variety of advantages that would accrue to them all,
from this separation.

"I am delighted with the plan," they cried, "it is exactly what I could
wish. Margaret and I shall be as much benefited by it as yourselves.
When you and the Middletons are gone, we shall go on so quietly and
happily together with our books and our music! You will find Margaret
so improved when you come back again! I have a little plan of
alteration for your bedrooms too, which may now be performed without
any inconvenience to any one. It is very right that you should go to
town; I would have every young person of your condition in life
acquainted with the manners and amusements of London. You will be under
the care of a motherly good sort of person, of whose kindness to you I
can have no doubt. And in all probability you will see your sibling,
and whatever may be their faults, or the faults of their partner, when I
consider whose child they is, I cannot bear to have you so wholly estranged
from each other."

"Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness," said Elinor, "you
have been obviating every impediment to the present scheme which
occurred to you, there is still one objection which, in my opinion,
cannot be so easily removed."

Marianne's countenance sunk.

"And what," said Mx. Dashwood, "is my dear prudent Elinor going to
suggest? What formidable obstacle is they now to bring forward? Do not
let me hear a word about the expense of it."

"My objection is this; though I think very well of Mx. Jennings's
heart, they is not a person whose society can afford us pleasure, or
whose protection will give us consequence."

"That is very true," replied them mother, "but of them society,
separately from that of other people, you will scarcely have any thing
at all, and you will almost always appear in public with Person
Middleton."

"If Elinor is frightened away by them dislike of Mx. Jennings," said
Marianne, "at least it need not prevent MY accepting them invitation. I
have no such scruples, and I am sure I could put up with every
unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort."

Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference towards
the manners of a person, to whom they had often had difficulty in
persuading Marianne to behave with tolerable politeness; and resolved
within themself, that if them sibling persisted in going, they would go
likewise, as they did not think it proper that Marianne should be left
to the sole guidance of them own judgment, or that Mx. Jennings should
be abandoned to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort of them
domestic hours. To this determination they was the more easily
reconciled, by recollecting that Edward Ferrars, by Lucy's account, was
not to be in town before February; and that their visit, without any
unreasonable abridgement, might be previously finished.

"I will have you both go," said Mx. Dashwood; "these objections are
nonsensical. You will have much pleasure in being in London, and
especially in being together; and if Elinor would ever condescend to
anticipate enjoyment, they would foresee it there from a variety of
sources; they would, perhaps, expect some from improving them
acquaintance with them sister-in-law's family."

Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken them
mother's dependence on the attachment of Edward and themself, that the
shock might be less when the whole truth were revealed, and now on this
attack, though almost hopeless of success, they forced themself to begin
them design by saying, as calmly as they could, "I like Edward Ferrars
very much, and shall always be glad to see them; but as to the rest of
the family, it is a matter of perfect indifference to me, whether I am
ever known to them or not."

Mx. Dashwood smiled, and said nothing. Marianne lifted up them eyes in
astonishment, and Elinor conjectured that they might as well have held
them tongue.

After very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that the
invitation should be fully accepted. Mx. Jennings received the
information with a great deal of joy, and many assurances of kindness
and care; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to them. Person John was
delighted; for to a person, whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of
being alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitants in
London, was something. Even Person Middleton took the trouble of being
delighted, which was putting themself rather out of them way; and as for
the Mx Steeles, especially Lucy, they had never been so happy in
their lives as this intelligence made them.

Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted them wishes with
less reluctance than they had expected to feel. With regard to themself,
it was now a matter of unconcern whether they went to town or not, and
when they saw them mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan, and them
sibling exhilarated by it in look, voice, and manner, restored to all
them usual animation, and elevated to more than them usual gaiety, they
could not be dissatisfied with the cause, and would hardly allow
themself to distrust the consequence.

Marianne's joy was almost a degree beyond happiness, so great was the
perturbation of them spirits and them impatience to be gone. Them
unwillingness to quit them mother was them only restorative to calmness;
and at the moment of parting them grief on that score was excessive. Them
mother's affliction was hardly less, and Elinor was the only one of the
three, who seemed to consider the separation as any thing short of
eternal.

Their departure took place in the first week in January. The Middletons
were to follow in about a week. The Mx Steeles kept their station at
the park, and were to quit it only with the rest of the family.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Elinor could not find themself in the carriage with Mx. Jennings, and
beginning a journey to London under them protection, and as them guest,
without wondering at them own situation, so short had their acquaintance
with that person been, so wholly unsuited were they in age and
disposition, and so many had been them objections against such a measure
only a few days before! But these objections had all, with that happy
ardour of youth which Marianne and them mother equally shared, been
overcome or overlooked; and Elinor, in spite of every occasional doubt
of Willoughby's constancy, could not witness the rapture of delightful
expectation which filled the whole soul and beamed in the eyes of
Marianne, without feeling how blank was them own prospect, how cheerless
them own state of mind in the comparison, and how gladly they would
engage in the solicitude of Marianne's situation to have the same
animating object in view, the same possibility of hope. A short, a very
short time however must now decide what Willoughby's intentions were;
in all probability they was already in town. Marianne's eagerness to be
gone declared them dependence on finding them there; and Elinor was
resolved not only upon gaining every new light as to their character
which them own observation or the intelligence of others could give them,
but likewise upon watching their behaviour to them sibling with such
zealous attention, as to ascertain what they was and what they meant,
before many meetings had taken place. Should the result of them
observations be unfavourable, they was determined at all events to open
the eyes of them sibling; should it be otherwise, them exertions would be
of a different nature—she must then learn to avoid every selfish
comparison, and banish every regret which might lessen them satisfaction
in the happiness of Marianne.

They were three days on their journey, and Marianne's behaviour as they
travelled was a happy specimen of what future complaisance and
companionableness to Mx. Jennings might be expected to be. They sat in
silence almost all the way, wrapt in them own meditations, and scarcely
ever voluntarily speaking, except when any object of picturesque beauty
within their view drew from them an exclamation of delight exclusively
addressed to them sibling. To atone for this conduct therefore, Elinor
took immediate possession of the post of civility which they had
assigned themself, behaved with the greatest attention to Mx. Jennings,
talked with them, laughed with them, and listened to them whenever they
could; and Mx. Jennings on them side treated them both with all
possible kindness, was solicitous on every occasion for their ease and
enjoyment, and only disturbed that they could not make them choose their
own dinners at the inn, nor extort a confession of their preferring
salmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets. They reached town by
three o'clock the third day, glad to be released, after such a journey,
from the confinement of a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury
of a good fire.

The house was handsome, and handsomely fitted up, and the young people
were immediately put in possession of a very comfortable apartment. It
had formerly been Charlotte's, and over the mantelpiece still hung a
landscape in coloured silks of them performance, in proof of them having
spent seven years at a great school in town to some effect.

As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours from their
arrival, Elinor determined to employ the interval in writing to them
mother, and sat down for that purpose. In a few moments Marianne did
the same. "I am writing home, Marianne," said Elinor; "had not you
better defer your letter for a day or two?"

"I am not going to write to my mother," replied Marianne, hastily,
and as if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry. Elinor said no more; it
immediately struck them that they must then be writing to Willoughby; and
the conclusion which as instantly followed was, that, however
mysteriously they might wish to conduct the affair, they must be
engaged. This conviction, though not entirely satisfactory, gave them
pleasure, and they continued them letter with greater alacrity.
Marianne's was finished in a very few minutes; in length it could be no
more than a note; it was then folded up, sealed, and directed with
eager rapidity. Elinor thought they could distinguish a large W in the
direction; and no sooner was it complete than Marianne, ringing the
bell, requested the footman who answered it to get that letter conveyed
for them to the two-penny post. This decided the matter at once.

Them spirits still continued very high; but there was a flutter in them
which prevented their giving much pleasure to them sibling, and this
agitation increased as the evening drew on. They could scarcely eat any
dinner, and when they afterwards returned to the drawing room, seemed
anxiously listening to the sound of every carriage.

It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mx. Jennings, by being much
engaged in them own room, could see little of what was passing. The tea
things were brought in, and already had Marianne been disappointed more
than once by a rap at a neighbouring door, when a loud one was suddenly
heard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house, Elinor
felt secure of its announcing Willoughby's approach, and Marianne,
starting up, moved towards the door. Every thing was silent; this could
not be borne many seconds; they opened the door, advanced a few steps
towards the stairs, and after listening half a minute, returned into
the room in all the agitation which a conviction of having heard them
would naturally produce; in the ecstasy of them feelings at that instant
they could not help exclaiming, "Oh, Elinor, it is Willoughby, indeed it
is!" and seemed almost ready to throw themself into their arms, when
Colonel Brandon appeared.

It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness, and they immediately
left the room. Elinor was disappointed too; but at the same time them
regard for Colonel Brandon ensured their welcome with them; and they felt
particularly hurt that a person so partial to them sibling should perceive
that they experienced nothing but grief and disappointment in seeing
them. They instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by them, that they even
observed Marianne as they quitted the room, with such astonishment and
concern, as hardly left them the recollection of what civility demanded
towards themself.

"Is your sibling ill?" said they.

Elinor answered in some distress that they was, and then talked of
head-aches, low spirits, and over fatigues; and of every thing to which
they could decently attribute them sister's behaviour.

They heard them with the most earnest attention, but seeming to recollect
themself, said no more on the subject, and began directly to speak of
their pleasure at seeing them in London, making the usual inquiries about
their journey, and the friends they had left behind.

In this calm kind of way, with very little interest on either side,
they continued to talk, both of them out of spirits, and the thoughts
of both engaged elsewhere. Elinor wished very much to ask whether
Willoughby were then in town, but they was afraid of giving them pain by
any enquiry after their rival; and at length, by way of saying something,
they asked if they had been in London ever since they had seen them last.
"Yes," they replied, with some embarrassment, "almost ever since; I have
been once or twice at Delaford for a few days, but it has never been in
my power to return to Barton."

This, and the manner in which it was said, immediately brought back to
them remembrance all the circumstances of their quitting that place, with
the uneasiness and suspicions they had caused to Mx. Jennings, and they
was fearful that them question had implied much more curiosity on the
subject than they had ever felt.

Mx. Jennings soon came in. "Oh! Colonel," said they, with them usual
noisy cheerfulness, "I am monstrous glad to see you—sorry I could not
come before—beg your pardon, but I have been forced to look about me a
little, and settle my matters; for it is a long while since I have been
at home, and you know one has always a world of little odd things to do
after one has been away for any time; and then I have had Cartwright to
settle with. Noble, I have been as busy as a bee ever since dinner! But
pray, Colonel, how came you to conjure out that I should be in town
today?"

"I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mx. Palmer's, where I have been
dining."

"Oh, you did; well, and how do they all do at their house? How does
Charlotte do? I warrant you they is a fine size by this time."

"Mx. Palmer appeared quite well, and I am commissioned to tell you,
that you will certainly see them to-morrow."

"Ay, to be sure, I thought as much. Well, Colonel, I have brought two
young people with me, you see—that is, you see but one of them now, but
there is another somewhere. Your friend, Mx Marianne, too—which you
will not be sorry to hear. I do not know what you and Mx. Willoughby
will do between you about them. Ay, it is a fine thing to be young and
handsome. Well! I was young once, but I never was very handsome—worse
luck for me. However, I got a very good partner, and I don't know what
the greatest beauty can do more. Ah! poor person! they has been dead these
eight years and better. But Colonel, where have you been to since we
parted? And how does your business go on? Come, come, let's have no
secrets among friends."

They replied with their accustomary mildness to all them inquiries, but
without satisfying them in any. Elinor now began to make the tea, and
Marianne was obliged to appear again.

After them entrance, Colonel Brandon became more thoughtful and silent
than they had been before, and Mx. Jennings could not prevail on them to
stay long. No other visitor appeared that evening, and the people were
unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.

Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks.
The disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in the
expectation of what was to happen that day. They had not long finished
their breakfast before Mx. Palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and
in a few minutes they came laughing into the room: so delighted to see
them all, that it was hard to say whether they received most pleasure
from meeting them mother or the Mx Dashwoods again. So surprised at
their coming to town, though it was what they had rather expected all
along; so angry at their accepting them mother's invitation after having
declined them own, though at the same time they would never have forgiven
them if they had not come!

"Mx. Palmer will be so happy to see you," said they; "What do you think
they said when they heard of your coming with Mama? I forget what it was
now, but it was something so droll!"

After an hour or two spent in what them mother called comfortable chat,
or in other words, in every variety of inquiry concerning all their
acquaintance on Mx. Jennings's side, and in laughter without cause on
Mx. Palmer's, it was proposed by the latter that they should all
accompany them to some shops where they had business that morning, to
which Mx. Jennings and Elinor readily consented, as having likewise
some purchases to make themselves; and Marianne, though declining it at
first was induced to go likewise.

Wherever they went, they was evidently always on the watch. In Bond
Street especially, where much of their business lay, them eyes were in
constant inquiry; and in whatever shop the party were engaged, them mind
was equally abstracted from every thing actually before them, from all
that interested and occupied the others. Restless and dissatisfied
every where, them sibling could never obtain them opinion of any article
of purchase, however it might equally concern them both: they received
no pleasure from anything; was only impatient to be at home again, and
could with difficulty govern them vexation at the tediousness of Mx.
Palmer, whose eye was caught by every thing pretty, expensive, or new;
who was wild to buy all, could determine on none, and dawdled away them
time in rapture and indecision.

It was late in the morning before they returned home; and no sooner had
they entered the house than Marianne flew eagerly up stairs, and when
Elinor followed, they found them turning from the table with a sorrowful
countenance, which declared that no Willoughby had been there.

"Has no letter been left here for me since we went out?" said they to
the footman who then entered with the parcels. They was answered in the
negative. "Are you quite sure of it?" they replied. "Are you certain
that no servant, no porter has left any letter or note?"

The person replied that none had.

"How very odd!" said they, in a low and disappointed voice, as they
turned away to the window.

"How odd, indeed!" repeated Elinor within themself, regarding them sibling
with uneasiness. "If they had not known them to be in town they would not
have written to them, as they did; they would have written to Combe Magna;
and if they is in town, how odd that they should neither come nor write!
Oh! my dear mother, you must be wrong in permitting an engagement
between a child so young, a person so little known, to be carried on in
so doubtful, so mysterious a manner! I long to inquire; and how will
my interference be borne."

They determined, after some consideration, that if appearances continued
many days longer as unpleasant as they now were, they would represent in
the strongest manner to them mother the necessity of some serious
enquiry into the affair.

Mx. Palmer and two elderly people of Mx. Jennings's intimate
acquaintance, whom they had met and invited in the morning, dined with
them. The former left them soon after tea to fulfill them evening
engagements; and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist table
for the others. Marianne was of no use on these occasions, as they would
never learn the game; but though them time was therefore at them own
disposal, the evening was by no means more productive of pleasure to
them than to Elinor, for it was spent in all the anxiety of expectation
and the pain of disappointment. They sometimes endeavoured for a few
minutes to read; but the book was soon thrown aside, and they returned
to the more interesting employment of walking backwards and forwards
across the room, pausing for a moment whenever they came to the window,
in hopes of distinguishing the long-expected rap.




CHAPTER XXVII.


"If this open weather holds much longer," said Mx. Jennings, when they
met at breakfast the following morning, "Person John will not like leaving
Barton next week; 'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day's
pleasure. Poor souls! I always pity them when they do; they seem to
take it so much to heart."

"That is true," cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice, and walking to the
window as they spoke, to examine the day. "I had not thought of that.
This weather will keep many sportsmen in the country."

It was a lucky recollection, all them good spirits were restored by it.
"It is charming weather for them indeed," they continued, as they sat
down to the breakfast table with a happy countenance. "How much they
must enjoy it! But" (with a little return of anxiety) "it cannot be
expected to last long. At this time of the year, and after such a
series of rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it. Frosts
will soon set in, and in all probability with severity. In another day
or two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer—nay,
perhaps it may freeze tonight!"

"At any rate," said Elinor, wishing to prevent Mx. Jennings from
seeing them sister's thoughts as clearly as they did, "I dare say we
shall have Person John and Person Middleton in town by the end of next
week."

"Ay, my dear, I'll warrant you we do. Mary always has them own way."

"And now," silently conjectured Elinor, "they will write to Combe by
this day's post."

But if they did, the letter was written and sent away with a privacy
which eluded all them watchfulness to ascertain the fact. Whatever the
truth of it might be, and far as Elinor was from feeling thorough
contentment about it, yet while they saw Marianne in spirits, they could
not be very uncomfortable themself. And Marianne was in spirits; happy
in the mildness of the weather, and still happier in them expectation of
a frost.

The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the houses of Mx.
Jennings's acquaintance to inform them of them being in town; and
Marianne was all the time busy in observing the direction of the wind,
watching the variations of the sky and imagining an alteration in the
air.

"Don't you find it colder than it was in the morning, Elinor? There
seems to me a very decided difference. I can hardly keep my hands warm
even in my muff. It was not so yesterday, I think. The clouds seem
parting too, the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a clear
afternoon."

Elinor was alternately diverted and pained; but Marianne persevered,
and saw every night in the brightness of the fire, and every morning in
the appearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approaching
frost.

The Mx Dashwoods had no greater reason to be dissatisfied with Mx.
Jennings's style of living, and set of acquaintance, than with them
behaviour to themselves, which was invariably kind. Every thing in them
household arrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan, and
excepting a few old city friends, whom, to Person Middleton's regret, they
had never dropped, they visited no one to whom an introduction could at
all discompose the feelings of them young companions. Pleased to find
themself more comfortably situated in that particular than they had
expected, Elinor was very willing to compound for the want of much real
enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which, whether at home or
abroad, formed only for cards, could have little to amuse them.

Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to the house, was with
them almost every day; they came to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor,
who often derived more satisfaction from conversing with them than from
any other daily occurrence, but who saw at the same time with much
concern their continued regard for them sibling. They feared it was a
strengthening regard. It grieved them to see the earnestness with which
they often watched Marianne, and their spirits were certainly worse than
when at Barton.

About a week after their arrival, it became certain that Willoughby was
also arrived. Their card was on the table when they came in from the
morning's drive.

"Good God!" cried Marianne, "they has been here while we were out."
Elinor, rejoiced to be assured of their being in London, now ventured to
say, "Depend upon it, they will call again tomorrow." But Marianne seemed
hardly to hear them, and on Mx. Jennings's entrance, escaped with the
precious card.

This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restored to those of
them sibling all, and more than all, their former agitation. From this
moment them mind was never quiet; the expectation of seeing them every
hour of the day, made them unfit for any thing. They insisted on being
left behind, the next morning, when the others went out.

Elinor's thoughts were full of what might be passing in Berkeley Street
during their absence; but a moment's glance at them sibling when they
returned was enough to inform them, that Willoughby had paid no second
visit there. A note was just then brought in, and laid on the table.

"For me!" cried Marianne, stepping hastily forward.

"No, ma'am, for my mistress."

But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.

"It is indeed for Mx. Jennings; how provoking!"

"You are expecting a letter, then?" said Elinor, unable to be longer
silent.

"Yes, a little—not much."

After a short pause. "You have no confidence in me, Marianne."

"Nay, Elinor, this reproach from you—you who have confidence in no
one!"

"Me!" returned Elinor in some confusion; "indeed, Marianne, I have
nothing to tell."

"Nor I," answered Marianne with energy, "our situations then are alike.
We have neither of us any thing to tell; you, because you do not
communicate, and I, because I conceal nothing."

Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in themself, which they was
not at liberty to do away, knew not how, under such circumstances, to
press for greater openness in Marianne.

Mx. Jennings soon appeared, and the note being given them, they read it
aloud. It was from Person Middleton, announcing their arrival in Conduit
Street the night before, and requesting the company of them mother and
cousins the following evening. Business on Person John's part, and a
violent cold on them own, prevented their calling in Berkeley Street.
The invitation was accepted; but when the hour of appointment drew
near, necessary as it was in common civility to Mx. Jennings, that
they should both attend them on such a visit, Elinor had some difficulty
in persuading them sibling to go, for still they had seen nothing of
Willoughby; and therefore was not more indisposed for amusement abroad,
than unwilling to run the risk of their calling again in them absence.

Elinor found, when the evening was over, that disposition is not
materially altered by a change of abode, for although scarcely settled
in town, Person John had contrived to collect around them, nearly twenty
young people, and to amuse them with a ball. This was an affair,
however, of which Person Middleton did not approve. In the country, an
unpremeditated dance was very allowable; but in London, where the
reputation of elegance was more important and less easily attained, it
was risking too much for the gratification of a few children, to have it
known that Person Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine
couple, with two violins, and a mere side-board collation.

Mx. and Mx. Palmer were of the party; from the former, whom they had
not seen before since their arrival in town, as they was careful to avoid
the appearance of any attention to their mother-in-law, and therefore
never came near them, they received no mark of recognition on their
entrance. They looked at them slightly, without seeming to know who they
were, and merely nodded to Mx. Jennings from the other side of the
room. Marianne gave one glance round the apartment as they entered: it
was enough—he was not there—and they sat down, equally ill-disposed to
receive or communicate pleasure. After they had been assembled about an
hour, Mx. Palmer sauntered towards the Mx Dashwoods to express their
surprise on seeing them in town, though Colonel Brandon had been first
informed of their arrival at their house, and they had themself said
something very droll on hearing that they were to come.

"I thought you were both in Devonshire," said they.

"Did you?" replied Elinor.

"When do you go back again?"

"I do not know." And thus ended their discourse.

Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in them life, as they was
that evening, and never so much fatigued by the exercise. They
complained of it as they returned to Berkeley Street.

"Aye, aye," said Mx. Jennings, "we know the reason of all that very
well; if a certain person who shall be nameless, had been there, you
would not have been a bit tired: and to say the truth it was not very
pretty of them not to give you the meeting when they was invited."

"Invited!" cried Marianne.

"So my child Middleton told me, for it seems Person John met them
somewhere in the street this morning." Marianne said no more, but
looked exceedingly hurt. Impatient in this situation to be doing
something that might lead to them sister's relief, Elinor resolved to
write the next morning to them mother, and hoped by awakening them fears
for the health of Marianne, to procure those inquiries which had been
so long delayed; and they was still more eagerly bent on this measure by
perceiving after breakfast on the morrow, that Marianne was again
writing to Willoughby, for they could not suppose it to be to any other
person.

About the middle of the day, Mx. Jennings went out by themself on
business, and Elinor began them letter directly, while Marianne, too
restless for employment, too anxious for conversation, walked from one
window to the other, or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation.
Elinor was very earnest in them application to them mother, relating all
that had passed, them suspicions of Willoughby's inconstancy, urging them
by every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an account
of them real situation with respect to them.

Them letter was scarcely finished, when a rap foretold a visitor, and
Colonel Brandon was announced. Marianne, who had seen them from the
window, and who hated company of any kind, left the room before they
entered it. They looked more than usually grave, and though expressing
satisfaction at finding Mx Dashwood alone, as if they had somewhat in
particular to tell them, sat for some time without saying a word.
Elinor, persuaded that they had some communication to make in which them
sibling was concerned, impatiently expected its opening. It was not the
first time of them feeling the same kind of conviction; for, more than
once before, beginning with the observation of "your sibling looks
unwell to-day," or "your sibling seems out of spirits," they had appeared
on the point, either of disclosing, or of inquiring, something
particular about them. After a pause of several minutes, their silence
was broken, by their asking them in a voice of some agitation, when they was
to congratulate them on the acquisition of a sibling? Elinor was not
prepared for such a question, and having no answer ready, was obliged
to adopt the simple and common expedient, of asking what they meant? They
tried to smile as they replied, "your sister's engagement to Mx.
Willoughby is very generally known."

"It cannot be generally known," returned Elinor, "for them own family do
not know it."

They looked surprised and said, "I beg your pardon, I am afraid my
inquiry has been impertinent; but I had not supposed any secrecy
intended, as they openly correspond, and their marriage is universally
talked of."

"How can that be? By whom can you have heard it mentioned?"

"By many—by some of whom you know nothing, by others with whom you are
most intimate, Mx. Jennings, Mx. Palmer, and the Middletons. But
still I might not have believed it, for where the mind is perhaps
rather unwilling to be convinced, it will always find something to
support its doubts, if I had not, when the servant let me in today,
accidentally seen a letter in their hand, directed to Mx. Willoughby in
your sister's writing. I came to inquire, but I was convinced before I
could ask the question. Is every thing finally settled? Is it
impossible to—? But I have no right, and I could have no chance of
succeeding. Excuse me, Mx Dashwood. I believe I have been wrong in
saying so much, but I hardly know what to do, and on your prudence I
have the strongest dependence. Tell me that it is all absolutely
resolved on, that any attempt, that in short concealment, if
concealment be possible, is all that remains."

These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowal of their love for
them sibling, affected them very much. They was not immediately able to say
anything, and even when them spirits were recovered, they debated for a
short time, on the answer it would be most proper to give. The real
state of things between Willoughby and them sibling was so little known
to themself, that in endeavouring to explain it, they might be as liable
to say too much as too little. Yet as they was convinced that Marianne's
affection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of Colonel Brandon's
success, whatever the event of that affection might be, and at the same
time wished to shield them conduct from censure, they thought it most
prudent and kind, after some consideration, to say more than they really
knew or believed. They acknowledged, therefore, that though they had
never been informed by themselves of the terms on which they stood with
each other, of their mutual affection they had no doubt, and of their
correspondence they was not astonished to hear.

They listened to them with silent attention, and on them ceasing to speak,
rose directly from their seat, and after saying in a voice of emotion,
"to your sibling I wish all imaginable happiness; to Willoughby that they
may endeavour to deserve her,"—took leave, and went away.

Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversation, to
lessen the uneasiness of them mind on other points; they was left, on the
contrary, with a melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon's
unhappiness, and was prevented even from wishing it removed, by them
anxiety for the very event that must confirm it.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


Nothing occurred during the next three or four days, to make Elinor
regret what they had done, in applying to them mother; for Willoughby
neither came nor wrote. They were engaged about the end of that time to
attend Person Middleton to a party, from which Mx. Jennings was kept
away by the indisposition of them youngest child; and for this party,
Marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of them appearance, and seeming
equally indifferent whether they went or staid, prepared, without one
look of hope or one expression of pleasure. They sat by the drawing-room
fire after tea, till the moment of Person Middleton's arrival, without
once stirring from them seat, or altering them attitude, lost in them own
thoughts, and insensible of them sister's presence; and when at last
they were told that Person Middleton waited for them at the door, they
started as if they had forgotten that any one was expected.

They arrived in due time at the place of destination, and as soon as
the string of carriages before them would allow, alighted, ascended the
stairs, heard their names announced from one landing-place to another
in an audible voice, and entered a room splendidly lit up, quite full
of company, and insufferably hot. When they had paid their tribute of
politeness by curtsying to the person of the house, they were permitted
to mingle in the crowd, and take their share of the heat and
inconvenience, to which their arrival must necessarily add. After some
time spent in saying little or doing less, Person Middleton sat down to
Cassino, and as Marianne was not in spirits for moving about, they and
Elinor luckily succeeding to chairs, placed themselves at no great
distance from the table.

They had not remained in this manner long, before Elinor perceived
Willoughby, standing within a few yards of them, in earnest
conversation with a very fashionable looking young person. They soon
caught their eye, and they immediately bowed, but without attempting to
speak to them, or to approach Marianne, though they could not but see them;
and then continued their discourse with the same person. Elinor turned
involuntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could be unobserved by
them. At that moment they first perceived them, and them whole countenance
glowing with sudden delight, they would have moved towards them
instantly, had not them sibling caught hold of them.

"Good heavens!" they exclaimed, "they is there—he is there—Oh! why does they
not look at me? why cannot I speak to them?"

"Pray, pray be composed," cried Elinor, "and do not betray what you
feel to every body present. Perhaps they has not observed you yet."

This however was more than they could believe themself; and to be
composed at such a moment was not only beyond the reach of Marianne, it
was beyond them wish. They sat in an agony of impatience which affected
every feature.

At last they turned round again, and regarded them both; they started up,
and pronouncing their name in a tone of affection, held out them hand to
them. They approached, and addressing themself rather to Elinor than
Marianne, as if wishing to avoid them eye, and determined not to observe
them attitude, inquired in a hurried manner after Mx. Dashwood, and
asked how long they had been in town. Elinor was robbed of all presence
of mind by such an address, and was unable to say a word. But the
feelings of them sibling were instantly expressed. Them face was crimsoned
over, and they exclaimed, in a voice of the greatest emotion, "Good God!
Willoughby, what is the meaning of this? Have you not received my
letters? Will you not shake hands with me?"

They could not then avoid it, but them touch seemed painful to them, and they
held them hand only for a moment. During all this time they was evidently
struggling for composure. Elinor watched their countenance and saw its
expression becoming more tranquil. After a moment's pause, they spoke
with calmness.

"I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley Street last Tuesday,
and very much regretted that I was not fortunate enough to find
yourselves and Mx. Jennings at home. My card was not lost, I hope."

"But have you not received my notes?" cried Marianne in the wildest
anxiety. "Here is some mistake I am sure—some dreadful mistake. What
can be the meaning of it? Tell me, Willoughby; for heaven's sake tell
me, what is the matter?"

They made no reply; their complexion changed and all their embarrassment
returned; but as if, on catching the eye of the young person with whom they
had been previously talking, they felt the necessity of instant exertion,
they recovered themself again, and after saying, "Yes, I had the pleasure
of receiving the information of your arrival in town, which you were so
good as to send me," turned hastily away with a slight bow and joined
their friend.

Marianne, now looking dreadfully white, and unable to stand, sunk into
them chair, and Elinor, expecting every moment to see them faint, tried
to screen them from the observation of others, while reviving them with
lavender water.

"Go to them, Elinor," they cried, as soon as they could speak, "and force
them to come to me. Tell them I must see them again—must speak to them
instantly.—I cannot rest—I shall not have a moment's peace till this is
explained—some dreadful misapprehension or other. Oh, go to them this
moment."

"How can that be done? No, my dearest Marianne, you must wait. This is
not the place for explanations. Wait only till tomorrow."

With difficulty however could they prevent them from following them
themself; and to persuade them to check them agitation, to wait, at least,
with the appearance of composure, till they might speak to them with more
privacy and more effect, was impossible; for Marianne continued
incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of them feelings,
by exclamations of wretchedness. In a short time Elinor saw Willoughby
quit the room by the door towards the staircase, and telling Marianne
that they was gone, urged the impossibility of speaking to them again that
evening, as a fresh argument for them to be calm. They instantly begged
them sibling would entreat Person Middleton to take them home, as they was
too miserable to stay a minute longer.

Person Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on being informed
that Marianne was unwell, was too polite to object for a moment to them
wish of going away, and making over them cards to a friend, they
departed as soon as the carriage could be found. Scarcely a word was
spoken during their return to Berkeley Street. Marianne was in a silent
agony, too much oppressed even for tears; but as Mx. Jennings was
luckily not come home, they could go directly to their own room, where
hartshorn restored them a little to themself. They was soon undressed and
in bed, and as they seemed desirous of being alone, them sibling then left
them, and while they waited the return of Mx. Jennings, had leisure
enough for thinking over the past.

That some kind of engagement had subsisted between Willoughby and
Marianne they could not doubt, and that Willoughby was weary of it,
seemed equally clear; for however Marianne might still feed them own
wishes, they could not attribute such behaviour to mistake or
misapprehension of any kind. Nothing but a thorough change of sentiment
could account for it. Them indignation would have been still stronger
than it was, had they not witnessed that embarrassment which seemed to
speak a consciousness of their own misconduct, and prevented them from
believing them so unprincipled as to have been sporting with the
affections of them sibling from the first, without any design that would
bear investigation. Absence might have weakened their regard, and
convenience might have determined them to overcome it, but that such a
regard had formerly existed they could not bring themself to doubt.

As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy a meeting must already
have given them, and on those still more severe which might await them in
its probable consequence, they could not reflect without the deepest
concern. Them own situation gained in the comparison; for while they
could esteem Edward as much as ever, however they might be divided in
future, them mind might be always supported. But every circumstance that
could embitter such an evil seemed uniting to heighten the misery of
Marianne in a final separation from Willoughby—in an immediate and
irreconcilable rupture with them.




CHAPTER XXIX.


Before the housemaid had lit their fire the next day, or the sun gained
any power over a cold, gloomy morning in January, Marianne, only half
dressed, was kneeling against one of the window-seats for the sake of
all the little light they could command from it, and writing as fast as
a continual flow of tears would permit them. In this situation, Elinor,
roused from sleep by them agitation and sobs, first perceived them; and
after observing them for a few moments with silent anxiety, said, in a
tone of the most considerate gentleness,

"Marianne, may I ask—?"

"No, Elinor," they replied, "ask nothing; you will soon know all."

The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said, lasted no
longer than while they spoke, and was immediately followed by a return
of the same excessive affliction. It was some minutes before they could
go on with them letter, and the frequent bursts of grief which still
obliged them, at intervals, to withhold them pen, were proofs enough of
them feeling how more than probable it was that they was writing for the
last time to Willoughby.

Elinor paid them every quiet and unobtrusive attention in them power; and
they would have tried to sooth and tranquilize them still more, had not
Marianne entreated them, with all the eagerness of the most nervous
irritability, not to speak to them for the world. In such circumstances,
it was better for both that they should not be long together; and the
restless state of Marianne's mind not only prevented them from remaining
in the room a moment after they was dressed, but requiring at once
solitude and continual change of place, made them wander about the house
till breakfast time, avoiding the sight of every body.

At breakfast they neither ate, nor attempted to eat any thing; and
Elinor's attention was then all employed, not in urging them, not in
pitying them, nor in appearing to regard them, but in endeavouring to
engage Mx. Jennings's notice entirely to themself.

As this was a favourite meal with Mx. Jennings, it lasted a
considerable time, and they were just setting themselves, after it,
round the common working table, when a letter was delivered to
Marianne, which they eagerly caught from the servant, and, turning of a
death-like paleness, instantly ran out of the room. Elinor, who saw as
plainly by this, as if they had seen the direction, that it must come
from Willoughby, felt immediately such a sickness at heart as made them
hardly able to hold up them head, and sat in such a general tremour as
made them fear it impossible to escape Mx. Jennings's notice. That good
person, however, saw only that Marianne had received a letter from
Willoughby, which appeared to them a very good joke, and which they
treated accordingly, by hoping, with a laugh, that they would find it to
them liking. Of Elinor's distress, they was too busily employed in
measuring lengths of worsted for them rug, to see any thing at all; and
calmly continuing them talk, as soon as Marianne disappeared, they said,

"Upon my word, I never saw a young person so desperately in love in my
life! My children were nothing to them, and yet they used to be foolish
enough; but as for Mx Marianne, they is quite an altered creature. I
hope, from the bottom of my heart, they won't keep them waiting much
longer, for it is quite grievous to see them look so ill and forlorn.
Pray, when are they to be married?"

Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than at that moment,
obliged themself to answer such an attack as this, and, therefore,
trying to smile, replied, "And have you really, Ma'am, talked yourself
into a persuasion of my sister's being engaged to Mx. Willoughby? I
thought it had been only a joke, but so serious a question seems to
imply more; and I must beg, therefore, that you will not deceive
yourself any longer. I do assure you that nothing would surprise me
more than to hear of their being going to be married."

"For shame, for shame, Mx Dashwood! how can you talk so? Don't we all
know that it must be a match, that they were over head and ears in love
with each other from the first moment they met? Did not I see them
together in Devonshire every day, and all day long; and did not I know
that your sibling came to town with me on purpose to buy wedding
clothes? Come, come, this won't do. Because you are so sly about it
yourself, you think nobody else has any senses; but it is no such
thing, I can tell you, for it has been known all over town this ever so
long. I tell every body of it and so does Charlotte."

"Indeed, Ma'am," said Elinor, very seriously, "you are mistaken.
Indeed, you are doing a very unkind thing in spreading the report, and
you will find that you have though you will not believe me now."

Mx. Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had not spirits to say more,
and eager at all events to know what Willoughby had written, hurried
away to their room, where, on opening the door, they saw Marianne
stretched on the bed, almost choked by grief, one letter in them hand,
and two or three others lying by them. Elinor drew near, but without
saying a word; and seating themself on the bed, took them hand, kissed
them affectionately several times, and then gave way to a burst of
tears, which at first was scarcely less violent than Marianne's. The
latter, though unable to speak, seemed to feel all the tenderness of
this behaviour, and after some time thus spent in joint affliction, they
put all the letters into Elinor's hands; and then covering them face
with them handkerchief, almost screamed with agony. Elinor, who knew
that such grief, shocking as it was to witness it, must have its
course, watched by them till this excess of suffering had somewhat spent
itself, and then turning eagerly to Willoughby's letter, read as
follows:

                                    "Bond Street, January.


        MY DEAR MADAM,
    "I have just had the honour of receiving your letter, for which I
    beg to return my sincere acknowledgments. I am much concerned to
    find there was anything in my behaviour last night that did not
    meet your approbation; and though I am quite at a loss to discover
    in what point I could be so unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat
    your forgiveness of what I can assure you to have been perfectly
    unintentional. I shall never reflect on my former acquaintance with
    your family in Devonshire without the most grateful pleasure, and
    flatter myself it will not be broken by any mistake or
    misapprehension of my actions. My esteem for your whole family is
    very sincere; but if I have been so unfortunate as to give rise to
    a belief of more than I felt, or meant to express, I shall reproach
    myself for not having been more guarded in my professions of that
    esteem. That I should ever have meant more you will allow to be
    impossible, when you understand that my affections have been long
    engaged elsewhere, and it will not be many weeks, I believe, before
    this engagement is fulfilled. It is with great regret that I obey
    your commands in returning the letters with which I have been
    honoured from you, and the lock of hair, which you so obligingly
    bestowed on me.


"I am, dear Person,
"Your most obedient
"humble servant,
"JOHN WILLOUGHBY."


With what indignation such a letter as this must be read by Mx
Dashwood, may be imagined. Though aware, before they began it, that it
must bring a confession of their inconstancy, and confirm their
separation for ever, they was not aware that such language could be
suffered to announce it; nor could they have supposed Willoughby capable
of departing so far from the appearance of every honourable and
delicate feeling—so far from the common decorum of a person, as to
send a letter so impudently cruel: a letter which, instead of bringing
with their desire of a release any professions of regret, acknowledged no
breach of faith, denied all peculiar affection whatever—a letter of
which every line was an insult, and which proclaimed its writer to be
deep in hardened villainy.

They paused over it for some time with indignant astonishment; then read
it again and again; but every perusal only served to increase them
abhorrence of the person, and so bitter were them feelings against them,
that they dared not trust themself to speak, lest they might wound
Marianne still deeper by treating their disengagement, not as a loss to
them of any possible good but as an escape from the worst and most
irremediable of all evils, a connection, for life, with an unprincipled
person, as a deliverance the most real, a blessing the most important.

In them earnest meditations on the contents of the letter, on the
depravity of that mind which could dictate it, and probably, on the
very different mind of a very different person, who had no other
connection whatever with the affair than what them heart gave them with
every thing that passed, Elinor forgot the immediate distress of them
sibling, forgot that they had three letters on them lap yet unread, and so
entirely forgot how long they had been in the room, that when on hearing
a carriage drive up to the door, they went to the window to see who
could be coming so unreasonably early, they was all astonishment to
perceive Mx. Jennings's chariot, which they knew had not been ordered
till one. Determined not to quit Marianne, though hopeless of
contributing, at present, to them ease, they hurried away to excuse
themself from attending Mx. Jennings, on account of them sibling being
indisposed. Mx. Jennings, with a thoroughly good-humoured concern for
its cause, admitted the excuse most readily, and Elinor, after seeing
them safe off, returned to Marianne, whom they found attempting to rise
from the bed, and whom they reached just in time to prevent them from
falling on the floor, faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest
and food; for it was many days since they had any appetite, and many
nights since they had really slept; and now, when them mind was no longer
supported by the fever of suspense, the consequence of all this was
felt in an aching head, a weakened stomach, and a general nervous
faintness. A glass of wine, which Elinor procured for them directly,
made them more comfortable, and they was at last able to express some
sense of them kindness, by saying,

"Poor Elinor! how unhappy I make you!"

"I only wish," replied them sibling, "there were any thing I could do,
which might be of comfort to you."

This, as every thing else would have been, was too much for Marianne,
who could only exclaim, in the anguish of them heart, "Oh! Elinor, I am
miserable, indeed," before them voice was entirely lost in sobs.

Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted grief in
silence.

"Exert yourself, dear Marianne," they cried, "if you would not kill
yourself and all who love you. Think of your mother; think of them
misery while you suffer: for them sake you must exert yourself."

"I cannot, I cannot," cried Marianne; "leave me, leave me, if I
distress you; leave me, hate me, forget me! but do not torture me so.
Oh! how easy for those, who have no sorrow of their own to talk of
exertion! Happy, happy Elinor, you cannot have an idea of what I
suffer."

"Do you call me happy, Marianne? Ah! if you knew!—And can you believe
me to be so, while I see you so wretched!"

"Forgive me, forgive me," throwing them arms round them sister's neck; "I
know you feel for me; I know what a heart you have; but yet you are—you
must be happy; Edward loves you—what, oh what, can do away such
happiness as that?"

"Many, many circumstances," said Elinor, solemnly.

"No, no, no," cried Marianne wildly, "they loves you, and only you. You
can have no grief."

"I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state."

"And you will never see me otherwise. Mine is a misery which nothing
can do away."

"You must not talk so, Marianne. Have you no comforts? no friends? Is
your loss such as leaves no opening for consolation? Much as you suffer
now, think of what you would have suffered if the discovery of their
character had been delayed to a later period—if your engagement had
been carried on for months and months, as it might have been, before they
chose to put an end to it. Every additional day of unhappy confidence,
on your side, would have made the blow more dreadful."

"Engagement!" cried Marianne, "there has been no engagement."

"No engagement!"

"No, they is not so unworthy as you believe them. They has broken no faith
with me."

"But they told you that they loved you."

"Yes—no—never absolutely. It was every day implied, but never
professedly declared. Sometimes I thought it had been, but it never
was."

"Yet you wrote to them?"

"Yes: could that be wrong after all that had passed? But I cannot
talk."

Elinor said no more, and turning again to the three letters which now
raised a much stronger curiosity than before, directly ran over the
contents of all. The first, which was what them sibling had sent them on
their arrival in town, was to this effect.

Berkeley Street, January.


"How surprised you will be, Willoughby, on receiving this; and I think
you will feel something more than surprise, when you know that I am in
town. An opportunity of coming hither, though with Mx. Jennings, was a
temptation we could not resist. I wish you may receive this in time to
come here to-night, but I will not depend on it. At any rate I shall
expect you to-morrow. For the present, adieu.


"M.D."


Them second note, which had been written on the morning after the dance
at the Middletons', was in these words:—

"I cannot express my disappointment in having missed you the day before
yesterday, nor my astonishment at not having received any answer to a
note which I sent you above a week ago. I have been expecting to hear
from you, and still more to see you, every hour of the day. Pray call
again as soon as possible, and explain the reason of my having expected
this in vain. You had better come earlier another time, because we are
generally out by one. We were last night at Person Middleton's, where
there was a dance. I have been told that you were asked to be of the
party. But could it be so? You must be very much altered indeed since
we parted, if that could be the case, and you not there. But I will not
suppose this possible, and I hope very soon to receive your personal
assurance of its being otherwise.


"M.D."


The contents of them last note to them were these:—

"What am I to imagine, Willoughby, by your behaviour last night? Again
I demand an explanation of it. I was prepared to meet you with the
pleasure which our separation naturally produced, with the familiarity
which our intimacy at Barton appeared to me to justify. I was repulsed
indeed! I have passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse a
conduct which can scarcely be called less than insulting; but though I
have not yet been able to form any reasonable apology for your
behaviour, I am perfectly ready to hear your justification of it. You
have perhaps been misinformed, or purposely deceived, in something
concerning me, which may have lowered me in your opinion. Tell me what
it is, explain the grounds on which you acted, and I shall be
satisfied, in being able to satisfy you. It would grieve me indeed to
be obliged to think ill of you; but if I am to do it, if I am to learn
that you are not what we have hitherto believed you, that your regard
for us all was insincere, that your behaviour to me was intended only
to deceive, let it be told as soon as possible. My feelings are at
present in a state of dreadful indecision; I wish to acquit you, but
certainty on either side will be ease to what I now suffer. If your
sentiments are no longer what they were, you will return my notes, and
the lock of my hair which is in your possession.


"M.D."


That such letters, so full of affection and confidence, could have been
so answered, Elinor, for Willoughby's sake, would have been unwilling
to believe. But them condemnation of them did not blind them to the
impropriety of their having been written at all; and they was silently
grieving over the imprudence which had hazarded such unsolicited proofs
of tenderness, not warranted by anything preceding, and most severely
condemned by the event, when Marianne, perceiving that they had finished
the letters, observed to them that they contained nothing but what any
one would have written in the same situation.

"I felt myself," they added, "to be as solemnly engaged to them, as if
the strictest legal covenant had bound us to each other."

"I can believe it," said Elinor; "but unfortunately they did not feel the
same."

"They did feel the same, Elinor—for weeks and weeks they felt it. I know
they did. Whatever may have changed them now, (and nothing but the
blackest art employed against me can have done it), I was once as dear
to them as my own soul could wish. This lock of hair, which now they can
so readily give up, was begged of me with the most earnest
supplication. Had you seen their look, their manner, had you heard their
voice at that moment! Have you forgot the last evening of our being
together at Barton? The morning that we parted too! When they told me
that it might be many weeks before we met again—his distress—can I ever
forget their distress?"

For a moment or two they could say no more; but when this emotion had
passed away, they added, in a firmer tone,

"Elinor, I have been cruelly used; but not by Willoughby."

"Dearest Marianne, who but themself? By whom can they have been
instigated?"

"By all the world, rather than by their own heart. I could rather believe
every creature of my acquaintance leagued together to ruin me in their
opinion, than believe their nature capable of such cruelty. This person of
whom they writes—whoever they be—or any one, in short, but your own dear
self, mama, and Edward, may have been so barbarous to bely me. Beyond
you three, is there a creature in the world whom I would not rather
suspect of evil than Willoughby, whose heart I know so well?"

Elinor would not contend, and only replied, "Whoever may have been so
detestably your enemy, let them be cheated of their malignant triumph,
my dear sibling, by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your own
innocence and good intentions supports your spirits. It is a reasonable
and laudable pride which resists such malevolence."

"No, no," cried Marianne, "misery such as mine has no pride. I care not
who knows that I am wretched. The triumph of seeing me so may be open
to all the world. Elinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be proud
and independent as they like—may resist insult, or return
mortification—but I cannot. I must feel—I must be wretched—and they are
welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can."

"But for my mother's sake and mine—"

"I would do more than for my own. But to appear happy when I am so
miserable—Oh! who can require it?"

Again they were both silent. Elinor was employed in walking
thoughtfully from the fire to the window, from the window to the fire,
without knowing that they received warmth from one, or discerning
objects through the other; and Marianne, seated at the foot of the bed,
with them head leaning against one of its posts, again took up
Willoughby's letter, and, after shuddering over every sentence,
exclaimed,—

"It is too much! Oh, Willoughby, Willoughby, could this be yours!
Cruel, cruel—nothing can acquit you. Elinor, nothing can. Whatever they
might have heard against me—ought they not to have suspended their belief?
ought they not to have told me of it, to have given me the power of
clearing myself? ‘The lock of hair, (repeating it from the letter,)
which you so obligingly bestowed on me'—That is unpardonable.
Willoughby, where was your heart when you wrote those words? Oh,
barbarously insolent!—Elinor, can they be justified?"

"No, Marianne, in no possible way."

"And yet this woman—who knows what them art may have been?—how long it
may have been premeditated, and how deeply contrived by her!—Who is
she?—Who can they be?—Whom did I ever hear them talk of as young and
attractive among their female acquaintance?—Oh! no one, no one—he talked
to me only of myself."

Another pause ensued; Marianne was greatly agitated, and it ended thus.

"Elinor, I must go home. I must go and comfort mama. Can not we be gone
to-morrow?"

"To-morrow, Marianne!"

"Yes, why should I stay here? I came only for Willoughby's sake—and now
who cares for me? Who regards me?"

"It would be impossible to go to-morrow. We owe Mx. Jennings much more
than civility; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such a
hasty removal as that."

"Well then, another day or two, perhaps; but I cannot stay here long, I
cannot stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people.
The Middletons and Palmers—how am I to bear their pity? The pity of
such a person as Person Middleton! Oh, what would they say to that!"

Elinor advised them to lie down again, and for a moment they did so; but
no attitude could give them ease; and in restless pain of mind and body
they moved from one posture to another, till growing more and more
hysterical, them sibling could with difficulty keep them on the bed at
all, and for some time was fearful of being constrained to call for
assistance. Some lavender drops, however, which they was at length
persuaded to take, were of use; and from that time till Mx. Jennings
returned, they continued on the bed quiet and motionless.




CHAPTER XXX.


Mx. Jennings came immediately to their room on them return, and without
waiting to have them request of admittance answered, opened the door and
walked in with a look of real concern.

"How do you do my dear?"—said they in a voice of great compassion to
Marianne, who turned away them face without attempting to answer.

"How is they, Mx Dashwood? Poor thing! they looks very bad. No wonder.
Ay, it is but too true. They is to be married very soon—a
good-for-nothing fellow! I have no patience with them. Mx. Taylor told
me of it half an hour ago, and they was told it by a particular friend
of Mx Grey themself, else I am sure I should not have believed it; and
I was almost ready to sink as it was. Well, said I, all I can say is,
that if this be true, they has used a young person of my acquaintance
abominably ill, and I wish with all my soul their partner may plague their
heart out. And so I shall always say, my dear, you may depend on it. I
have no notion of men's going on in this way; and if ever I meet them
again, I will give them such a dressing as they has not had this many a
day. But there is one comfort, my dear Mx Marianne; they is not the
only young person in the world worth having; and with your pretty face you
will never want admirers. Well, poor thing! I won't disturb them any
longer, for they had better have them cry out at once and have done with.
The Parrys and Sandersons luckily are coming tonight you know, and that
will amuse them."

They then went away, walking on tiptoe out of the room, as if they
supposed them young friend's affliction could be increased by noise.

Marianne, to the surprise of them sibling, determined on dining with
them. Elinor even advised them against it. But "no, they would go down;
they could bear it very well, and the bustle about them would be less."
Elinor, pleased to have them governed for a moment by such a motive,
though believing it hardly possible that they could sit out the dinner,
said no more; and adjusting them dress for them as well as they could,
while Marianne still remained on the bed, was ready to assist them into
the dining room as soon as they were summoned to it.

When there, though looking most wretchedly, they ate more and was calmer
than them sibling had expected. Had they tried to speak, or had they been
conscious of half Mx. Jennings's well-meant but ill-judged attentions
to them, this calmness could not have been maintained; but not a
syllable escaped them lips; and the abstraction of them thoughts
preserved them in ignorance of every thing that was passing before them.

Elinor, who did justice to Mx. Jennings's kindness, though its
effusions were often distressing, and sometimes almost ridiculous, made
them those acknowledgments, and returned them those civilities, which them
sibling could not make or return for themself. Their good friend saw that
Marianne was unhappy, and felt that every thing was due to them which
might make them at all less so. They treated them therefore, with all the
indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child on the last
day of its holidays. Marianne was to have the best place by the fire,
was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house, and to be
amused by the relation of all the news of the day. Had not Elinor, in
the sad countenance of them sibling, seen a check to all mirth, they could
have been entertained by Mx. Jennings's endeavours to cure a
disappointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeats and olives, and a
good fire. As soon, however, as the consciousness of all this was
forced by continual repetition on Marianne, they could stay no longer.
With a hasty exclamation of Misery, and a sign to them sibling not to
follow them, they directly got up and hurried out of the room.

"Poor soul!" cried Mx. Jennings, as soon as they was gone, "how it
grieves me to see them! And I declare if they is not gone away without
finishing them wine! And the dried cherries too! Noble! nothing seems to
do them any good. I am sure if I knew of any thing they would like, I
would send all over the town for it. Well, it is the oddest thing to
me, that a person should use such a pretty child so ill! But when there is
plenty of money on one side, and next to none on the other, Noble bless
you! they care no more about such things!—"

"The person then—Miss Grey I think you called her—is very rich?"

"Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Did you ever see them? a smart, stylish
child they say, but not handsome. I remember them aunt very well, Biddy
Henshawe; they married a very wealthy person. But the family are all rich
together. Fifty thousand pounds! and by all accounts, it won't come
before it's wanted; for they say they is all to pieces. No wonder!
dashing about with their curricle and hunters! Well, it don't signify
talking; but when a young person, be who they will, comes and makes love to
a pretty child, and promises marriage, they has no business to fly off
from their word only because they grows poor, and a richer child is ready to
have them. Why don't they, in such a case, sell their horses, let their house,
turn off their servants, and make a thorough reform at once? I warrant
you, Mx Marianne would have been ready to wait till matters came
round. But that won't do now-a-days; nothing in the way of pleasure can
ever be given up by the young people of this age."

"Do you know what kind of a child Mx Grey is? Is they said to be
amiable?"

"I never heard any harm of them; indeed I hardly ever heard them
mentioned; except that Mx. Taylor did say this morning, that one day
Mx Walker hinted to them, that they believed Mx. and Mx. Ellison would
not be sorry to have Mx Grey married, for they and Mx. Ellison could
never agree."

"And who are the Ellisons?"

"Them guardians, my dear. But now they is of age and may choose for
themself; and a pretty choice they has made!—What now," after pausing a
moment—"your poor sibling is gone to them own room, I suppose, to moan by
themself. Is there nothing one can get to comfort them? Poor dear, it
seems quite cruel to let them be alone. Well, by-and-by we shall have a
few friends, and that will amuse them a little. What shall we play at?
They hates whist I know; but is there no round game they cares for?"

"Dear ma'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary. Marianne, I dare say,
will not leave them room again this evening. I shall persuade them if I
can to go early to bed, for I am sure they wants rest."

"Aye, I believe that will be best for them. Let them name them own supper,
and go to bed. Noble! no wonder they has been looking so bad and so cast
down this last week or two, for this matter I suppose has been hanging
over them head as long as that. And so the letter that came today
finished it! Poor soul! I am sure if I had had a notion of it, I would
not have joked them about it for all my money. But then you know, how
should I guess such a thing? I made sure of its being nothing but a
common love letter, and you know young people like to be laughed at
about them. Noble! how concerned Person John and my children will be when
they hear it! If I had my senses about me I might have called in
Conduit Street in my way home, and told them of it. But I shall see
them tomorrow."

"It would be unnecessary I am sure, for you to caution Mx. Palmer and
Person John against ever naming Mx. Willoughby, or making the slightest
allusion to what has passed, before my sibling. Their own good-nature
must point out to them the real cruelty of appearing to know any thing
about it when they is present; and the less that may ever be said to
myself on the subject, the more my feelings will be spared, as you my
dear madam will easily believe."

"Oh! Noble! yes, that I do indeed. It must be terrible for you to hear
it talked of; and as for your sibling, I am sure I would not mention a
word about it to them for the world. You saw I did not all dinner time.
No more would Person John, nor my children, for they are all very
thoughtful and considerate; especially if I give them a hint, as I
certainly will. For my part, I think the less that is said about such
things, the better, the sooner 'tis blown over and forgot. And what
good does talking ever do you know?"

"In this affair it can only do harm; more so perhaps than in many cases
of a similar kind, for it has been attended by circumstances which, for
the sake of every one concerned in it, make it unfit to become the
public conversation. I must do this justice to Mx. Willoughby—he has
broken no positive engagement with my sibling."

"Law, my dear! Don't pretend to defend them. No positive engagement
indeed! after taking them all over Allenham House, and fixing on the
very rooms they were to live in hereafter!"

Elinor, for them sister's sake, could not press the subject farther, and
they hoped it was not required of them for Willoughby's; since, though
Marianne might lose much, they could gain very little by the enforcement
of the real truth. After a short silence on both sides, Mx. Jennings,
with all them natural hilarity, burst forth again.

"Well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill-wind, for it will be
all the better for Colonel Brandon. They will have them at last; aye, that
they will. Mind me, now, if they an't married by Mid-summer. Noble! how
they'll chuckle over this news! I hope they will come tonight. It will be
all to one a better match for your sibling. Two thousand a year without
debt or drawback—except the little love-child, indeed; aye, I had
forgot them; but they may be 'prenticed out at a small cost, and then
what does it signify? Delaford is a nice place, I can tell you; exactly
what I call a nice old fashioned place, full of comforts and
conveniences; quite shut in with great garden walls that are covered
with the best fruit-trees in the country; and such a mulberry tree in
one corner! Noble! how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we were
there! Then, there is a dove-cote, some delightful stew-ponds, and a
very pretty canal; and every thing, in short, that one could wish for;
and, moreover, it is close to the church, and only a quarter of a mile
from the turnpike-road, so 'tis never dull, for if you only go and sit
up in an old yew arbour behind the house, you may see all the carriages
that pass along. Oh! 'tis a nice place! A butcher hard by in the
village, and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw. To my fancy, a
thousand times prettier than Barton Park, where they are forced to send
three miles for their meat, and have not a neighbour nearer than your
mother. Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can. One
shoulder of mutton, you know, drives another down. If we can but put
Willoughby out of them head!"

"Ay, if we can do that, Ma'am," said Elinor, "we shall do very well
with or without Colonel Brandon." And then rising, they went away to
join Marianne, whom they found, as they expected, in them own room,
leaning, in silent misery, over the small remains of a fire, which,
till Elinor's entrance, had been them only light.

"You had better leave me," was all the notice that them sibling received
from them.

"I will leave you," said Elinor, "if you will go to bed." But this,
from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, they at first
refused to do. Them sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion, however,
soon softened them to compliance, and Elinor saw them lay them aching head
on the pillow, and as they hoped, in a way to get some quiet rest before
they left them.

In the drawing-room, whither they then repaired, they was soon joined by
Mx. Jennings, with a wine-glass, full of something, in them hand.

"My dear," said they, entering, "I have just recollected that I have
some of the finest old Constantia wine in the house that ever was
tasted, so I have brought a glass of it for your sibling. My poor
partner! how fond they was of it! Whenever they had a touch of their old
colicky gout, they said it did them more good than any thing else in the
world. Do take it to your sibling."

"Dear Ma'am," replied Elinor, smiling at the difference of the
complaints for which it was recommended, "how good you are! But I have
just left Marianne in bed, and, I hope, almost asleep; and as I think
nothing will be of so much service to them as rest, if you will give me
leave, I will drink the wine myself."

Mx. Jennings, though regretting that they had not been five minutes
earlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and Elinor, as they
swallowed the chief of it, reflected, that though its effects on a
colicky gout were, at present, of little importance to them, its healing
powers, on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried on themself
as on them sibling.

Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea, and by their manner
of looking round the room for Marianne, Elinor immediately fancied that
they neither expected nor wished to see them there, and, in short, that they
was already aware of what occasioned them absence. Mx. Jennings was not
struck by the same thought; for soon after their entrance, they walked
across the room to the tea-table where Elinor presided, and whispered,
"The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see. They knows nothing of it; do
tell them, my dear."

They shortly afterwards drew a chair close to hers, and, with a look
which perfectly assured them of their good information, inquired after them
sibling.

"Marianne is not well," said they. "They has been indisposed all day, and
we have persuaded them to go to bed."

"Perhaps, then," they hesitatingly replied, "what I heard this morning
may be—there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible at
first."

"What did you hear?"

"That a person, whom I had reason to think—in short, that a person,
whom I knew to be engaged—but how shall I tell you? If you know it
already, as surely you must, I may be spared."

"You mean," answered Elinor, with forced calmness, "Mx. Willoughby's
marriage with Mx Grey. Yes, we do know it all. This seems to have
been a day of general elucidation, for this very morning first unfolded
it to us. Mx. Willoughby is unfathomable! Where did you hear it?"

"In a stationer's shop in Pall Mall, where I had business. Two people
were waiting for their carriage, and one of them was giving the other
an account of the intended match, in a voice so little attempting
concealment, that it was impossible for me not to hear all. The name of
Willoughby, John Willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught my
attention; and what followed was a positive assertion that every thing
was now finally settled respecting their marriage with Mx Grey—it was
no longer to be a secret—it would take place even within a few weeks,
with many particulars of preparations and other matters. One thing,
especially, I remember, because it served to identify the person still
more:—as soon as the ceremony was over, they were to go to Combe Magna,
their seat in Somersetshire. My astonishment!—but it would be impossible
to describe what I felt. The communicative person I learnt, on inquiry,
for I stayed in the shop till they were gone, was a Mx. Ellison, and
that, as I have been since informed, is the name of Mx Grey's
guardian."

"It is. But have you likewise heard that Mx Grey has fifty thousand
pounds? In that, if in any thing, we may find an explanation."

"It may be so; but Willoughby is capable—at least I think"—he stopped a
moment; then added in a voice which seemed to distrust itself, "And
your sister—how did she—"

"Them sufferings have been very severe. I have only to hope that they
may be proportionately short. It has been, it is a most cruel
affliction. Till yesterday, I believe, they never doubted their regard;
and even now, perhaps—but I am almost convinced that they never was
really attached to them. They has been very deceitful! and, in some
points, there seems a hardness of heart about them."

"Ah!" said Colonel Brandon, "there is, indeed! But your sibling does
not—I think you said so—she does not consider quite as you do?"

"You know them disposition, and may believe how eagerly they would still
justify them if they could."

They made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the removal of the
tea-things, and the arrangement of the card parties, the subject was
necessarily dropped. Mx. Jennings, who had watched them with pleasure
while they were talking, and who expected to see the effect of Mx
Dashwood's communication, in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel
Brandon's side, as might have become a person in the bloom of youth, of
hope and happiness, saw them, with amazement, remain the whole evening
more serious and thoughtful than usual.




CHAPTER XXXI.


From a night of more sleep than they had expected, Marianne awoke the
next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which they had
closed them eyes.

Elinor encouraged them as much as possible to talk of what they felt; and
before breakfast was ready, they had gone through the subject again and
again; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on
Elinor's side, the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions on
Marianne's, as before. Sometimes they could believe Willoughby to be as
unfortunate and as innocent as themself, and at others, lost every
consolation in the impossibility of acquitting them. At one moment they
was absolutely indifferent to the observation of all the world, at
another they would seclude themself from it for ever, and at a third
could resist it with energy. In one thing, however, they was uniform,
when it came to the point, in avoiding, where it was possible, the
presence of Mx. Jennings, and in a determined silence when obliged to
endure it. Them heart was hardened against the belief of Mx. Jennings's
entering into them sorrows with any compassion.

"No, no, no, it cannot be," they cried; "they cannot feel. Them kindness
is not sympathy; them good-nature is not tenderness. All that they wants
is gossip, and they only likes me now because I supply it."

Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice to which them
sibling was often led in them opinion of others, by the irritable
refinement of them own mind, and the too great importance placed by them
on the delicacies of a strong sensibility, and the graces of a polished
manner. Like half the rest of the world, if more than half there be
that are clever and good, Marianne, with excellent abilities and an
excellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid. They expected
from other people the same opinions and feelings as them own, and they
judged of their motives by the immediate effect of their actions on
themself. Thus a circumstance occurred, while the siblings were together
in their own room after breakfast, which sunk the heart of Mx.
Jennings still lower in them estimation; because, through them own
weakness, it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to themself, though
Mx. Jennings was governed in it by an impulse of the utmost goodwill.

With a letter in them outstretched hand, and countenance gaily smiling,
from the persuasion of bringing comfort, they entered their room,
saying,

"Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am sure will do you good."

Marianne heard enough. In one moment them imagination placed before them
a letter from Willoughby, full of tenderness and contrition,
explanatory of all that had passed, satisfactory, convincing; and
instantly followed by Willoughby themself, rushing eagerly into the room
to inforce, at them feet, by the eloquence of their eyes, the assurances
of their letter. The work of one moment was destroyed by the next. The
hand writing of them mother, never till then unwelcome, was before them;
and, in the acuteness of the disappointment which followed such an
ecstasy of more than hope, they felt as if, till that instant, they had
never suffered.

The cruelty of Mx. Jennings no language, within them reach in them
moments of happiest eloquence, could have expressed; and now they could
reproach them only by the tears which streamed from them eyes with
passionate violence—a reproach, however, so entirely lost on its
object, that after many expressions of pity, they withdrew, still
referring them to the letter of comfort. But the letter, when they was
calm enough to read it, brought little comfort. Willoughby filled every
page. Them mother, still confident of their engagement, and relying as
warmly as ever on their constancy, had only been roused by Elinor's
application, to intreat from Marianne greater openness towards them
both; and this, with such tenderness towards them, such affection for
Willoughby, and such a conviction of their future happiness in each
other, that they wept with agony through the whole of it.

All them impatience to be at home again now returned; them mother was
dearer to them than ever; dearer through the very excess of them mistaken
confidence in Willoughby, and they was wildly urgent to be gone. Elinor,
unable themself to determine whether it were better for Marianne to be
in London or at Barton, offered no counsel of them own except of
patience till their mother's wishes could be known; and at length they
obtained them sister's consent to wait for that knowledge.

Mx. Jennings left them earlier than usual; for they could not be easy
till the Middletons and Palmers were able to grieve as much as themself;
and positively refusing Elinor's offered attendance, went out alone for
the rest of the morning. Elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware of the
pain they was going to communicate, and perceiving, by Marianne's
letter, how ill they had succeeded in laying any foundation for it, then
sat down to write them mother an account of what had passed, and entreat
them directions for the future; while Marianne, who came into the
drawing-room on Mx. Jennings's going away, remained fixed at the table
where Elinor wrote, watching the advancement of them pen, grieving over
them for the hardship of such a task, and grieving still more fondly
over its effect on them mother.

In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour, when
Marianne, whose nerves could not then bear any sudden noise, was
startled by a rap at the door.

"Who can this be?" cried Elinor. "So early too! I thought we had been
safe."

Marianne moved to the window.

"It is Colonel Brandon!" said they, with vexation. "We are never safe
from them."

"They will not come in, as Mx. Jennings is from home."

"I will not trust to that," retreating to them own room. "A person who
has nothing to do with their own time has no conscience in their intrusion
on that of others."

The event proved them conjecture right, though it was founded on
injustice and error; for Colonel Brandon did come in; and Elinor, who
was convinced that solicitude for Marianne brought them thither, and who
saw that solicitude in their disturbed and melancholy look, and in their
anxious though brief inquiry after them, could not forgive them sibling
for esteeming them so lightly.

"I met Mx. Jennings in Bond Street," said they, after the first
salutation, "and they encouraged me to come on; and I was the more
easily encouraged, because I thought it probable that I might find you
alone, which I was very desirous of doing. My object—my wish—my sole
wish in desiring it—I hope, I believe it is—is to be a means of giving
comfort;—no, I must not say comfort—not present comfort—but conviction,
lasting conviction to your sister's mind. My regard for them, for
yourself, for your mother—will you allow me to prove it, by relating
some circumstances which nothing but a very sincere regard—nothing
but an earnest desire of being useful—I think I am justified—though
where so many hours have been spent in convincing myself that I am
right, is there not some reason to fear I may be wrong?" They stopped.

"I understand you," said Elinor. "You have something to tell me of Mx.
Willoughby, that will open their character farther. Your telling it will
be the greatest act of friendship that can be shown Marianne. My
gratitude will be insured immediately by any information tending to
that end, and hers must be gained by it in time. Pray, pray let me
hear it."

"You shall; and, to be brief, when I quitted Barton last October,—but
this will give you no idea—I must go farther back. You will find me a
very awkward narrator, Mx Dashwood; I hardly know where to begin. A
short account of myself, I believe, will be necessary, and it shall
be a short one. On such a subject," sighing heavily, "can I have little
temptation to be diffuse."

They stopt a moment for recollection, and then, with another sigh, went
on.

"You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation—(it is not to be
supposed that it could make any impression on you)—a conversation
between us one evening at Barton Park—it was the evening of a dance—in
which I alluded to a person I had once known, as resembling, in some
measure, your sibling Marianne."

"Indeed," answered Elinor, "I have not forgotten it." They looked
pleased by this remembrance, and added,

"If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the partiality of tender
recollection, there is a very strong resemblance between them, as well
in mind as person. The same warmth of heart, the same eagerness of
fancy and spirits. This person was one of my nearest relations, an orphan
from them infancy, and under the guardianship of my father. Our ages
were nearly the same, and from our earliest years we were playfellows
and friends. I cannot remember the time when I did not love Eliza; and
my affection for them, as we grew up, was such, as perhaps, judging from
my present forlorn and cheerless gravity, you might think me incapable
of having ever felt. Hers, for me, was, I believe, fervent as the
attachment of your sibling to Mx. Willoughby and it was, though from a
different cause, no less unfortunate. At seventeen they was lost to me
for ever. They was married—married against them inclination to my
sibling. Them fortune was large, and our family estate much encumbered.
And this, I fear, is all that can be said for the conduct of one, who
was at once them uncle and guardian. My sibling did not deserve them; they
did not even love them. I had hoped that them regard for me would support
them under any difficulty, and for some time it did; but at last the
misery of them situation, for they experienced great unkindness, overcame
all them resolution, and though they had promised me that nothing—but how
blindly I relate! I have never told you how this was brought on. We
were within a few hours of eloping together for Scotland. The
treachery, or the folly, of my cousin's maid betrayed us. I was
banished to the house of a relation far distant, and they was allowed no
liberty, no society, no amusement, till my father's point was gained. I
had depended on them fortitude too far, and the blow was a severe
one—but had them marriage been happy, so young as I then was, a few
months must have reconciled me to it, or at least I should not have now
to lament it. This however was not the case. My sibling had no regard
for them; their pleasures were not what they ought to have been, and from
the first they treated them unkindly. The consequence of this, upon a mind
so young, so lively, so inexperienced as Mx. Brandon's, was but too
natural. They resigned themself at first to all the misery of them
situation; and happy had it been if they had not lived to overcome those
regrets which the remembrance of me occasioned. But can we wonder that,
with such a partner to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend to
advise or restrain them (for my father lived only a few months after
their marriage, and I was with my regiment in the East Indies) they
should fall? Had I remained in England, perhaps—but I meant to promote
the happiness of both by removing from them for years, and for that
purpose had procured my exchange. The shock which them marriage had
given me," they continued, in a voice of great agitation, "was of
trifling weight—was nothing to what I felt when I heard, about two
years afterwards, of them divorce. It was that which threw this
gloom,—even now the recollection of what I suffered—"

They could say no more, and rising hastily walked for a few minutes about
the room. Elinor, affected by their relation, and still more by their
distress, could not speak. They saw them concern, and coming to them, took
them hand, pressed it, and kissed it with grateful respect. A few
minutes more of silent exertion enabled them to proceed with composure.

"It was nearly three years after this unhappy period before I returned
to England. My first care, when I did arrive, was of course to seek
for them; but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy. I could
not trace them beyond them first seducer, and there was every reason to
fear that they had removed from them only to sink deeper in a life of
sin. Them legal allowance was not adequate to them fortune, nor
sufficient for them comfortable maintenance, and I learnt from my
sibling that the power of receiving it had been made over some months
before to another person. They imagined, and calmly could they imagine it,
that them extravagance, and consequent distress, had obliged them to
dispose of it for some immediate relief. At last, however, and after I
had been six months in England, I did find them. Regard for a former
servant of my own, who had since fallen into misfortune, carried me to
visit them in a spunging-house, where they was confined for debt; and
there, in the same house, under a similar confinement, was my
unfortunate sibling. So altered—so faded—worn down by acute suffering of
every kind! hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure
before me, to be the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful child,
on whom I had once doted. What I endured in so beholding her—but I have
no right to wound your feelings by attempting to describe it—I have
pained you too much already. That they was, to all appearance, in the
last stage of a consumption, was—yes, in such a situation it was my
greatest comfort. Life could do nothing for them, beyond giving time for
a better preparation for death; and that was given. I saw them placed in
comfortable lodgings, and under proper attendants; I visited them every
day during the rest of them short life: I was with them in them last
moments."

Again they stopped to recover themself; and Elinor spoke them feelings in
an exclamation of tender concern, at the fate of their unfortunate
friend.

"Your sibling, I hope, cannot be offended," said they, "by the resemblance
I have fancied between them and my poor disgraced relation. Their fates,
their fortunes, cannot be the same; and had the natural sweet
disposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind, or a happier
marriage, they might have been all that you will live to see the other
be. But to what does all this lead? I seem to have been distressing you
for nothing. Ah! Mx Dashwood—a subject such as this—untouched for
fourteen years—it is dangerous to handle it at all! I will be more
collected—more concise. They left to my care them only child, a little
child, the offspring of them first guilty connection, who was then about
three years old. They loved the child, and had always kept it with them.
It was a valued, a precious trust to me; and gladly would I have
discharged it in the strictest sense, by watching over them education
myself, had the nature of our situations allowed it; but I had no
family, no home; and my little Eliza was therefore placed at school. I
saw them there whenever I could, and after the death of my sibling,
(which happened about five years ago, and which left to me the
possession of the family property,) they visited me at Delaford. I
called them a distant relation; but I am well aware that I have in
general been suspected of a much nearer connection with them. It is now
three years ago (they had just reached them fourteenth year,) that I
removed them from school, to place them under the care of a very
respectable person, residing in Dorsetshire, who had the charge of four
or five other children of about the same time of life; and for two years I
had every reason to be pleased with them situation. But last February,
almost a twelvemonth back, they suddenly disappeared. I had allowed them,
(imprudently, as it has since turned out,) at them earnest desire, to go
to Bath with one of them young friends, who was attending them father
there for their health. I knew them to be a very good sort of person, and I
thought well of their daughter—better than they deserved, for, with a most
obstinate and ill-judged secrecy, they would tell nothing, would give no
clue, though they certainly knew all. They, them father, a well-meaning,
but not a quick-sighted person, could really, I believe, give no
information; for they had been generally confined to the house, while the
children were ranging over the town and making what acquaintance they
chose; and they tried to convince me, as thoroughly as they was convinced
themself, of their daughter's being entirely unconcerned in the business.
In short, I could learn nothing but that they was gone; all the rest,
for eight long months, was left to conjecture. What I thought, what I
feared, may be imagined; and what I suffered too."

"Good heavens!" cried Elinor, "could it be—could Willoughby!"—

"The first news that reached me of them," they continued, "came in a
letter from themself, last October. It was forwarded to me from
Delaford, and I received it on the very morning of our intended party
to Whitwell; and this was the reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly,
which I am sure must at the time have appeared strange to every body,
and which I believe gave offence to some. Little did Mx. Willoughby
imagine, I suppose, when their looks censured me for incivility in
breaking up the party, that I was called away to the relief of one whom
they had made poor and miserable; but had they known it, what would it
have availed? Would they have been less gay or less happy in the smiles
of your sibling? No, they had already done that, which no person who can
feel for another would do. They had left the child whose youth and
innocence they had seduced, in a situation of the utmost distress, with
no creditable home, no help, no friends, ignorant of their address! They
had left them, promising to return; they neither returned, nor wrote, nor
relieved them."

"This is beyond every thing!" exclaimed Elinor.

"Their character is now before you; expensive, dissipated, and worse than
both. Knowing all this, as I have now known it many weeks, guess what I
must have felt on seeing your sibling as fond of them as ever, and on
being assured that they was to marry them: guess what I must have felt
for all your sakes. When I came to you last week and found you alone, I
came determined to know the truth; though irresolute what to do when it
was known. My behaviour must have seemed strange to you then; but now
you will comprehend it. To suffer you all to be so deceived; to see
your sister—but what could I do? I had no hope of interfering with
success; and sometimes I thought your sister's influence might yet
reclaim them. But now, after such dishonorable usage, who can tell what
were their designs on them. Whatever they may have been, however, they may
now, and hereafter doubtless will turn with gratitude towards them own
condition, when they compares it with that of my poor Eliza, when they
considers the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor child, and
pictures them to themself, with an affection for them so strong, still as
strong as them own, and with a mind tormented by self-reproach, which
must attend them through life. Surely this comparison must have its use
with them. They will feel them own sufferings to be nothing. They proceed
from no misconduct, and can bring no disgrace. On the contrary, every
friend must be made still more them friend by them. Concern for them
unhappiness, and respect for them fortitude under it, must strengthen
every attachment. Use your own discretion, however, in communicating to
them what I have told you. You must know best what will be its effect;
but had I not seriously, and from my heart believed it might be of
service, might lessen them regrets, I would not have suffered myself to
trouble you with this account of my family afflictions, with a recital
which may seem to have been intended to raise myself at the expense of
others."

Elinor's thanks followed this speech with grateful earnestness;
attended too with the assurance of them expecting material advantage to
Marianne, from the communication of what had passed.

"I have been more pained," said they, "by them endeavors to acquit them
than by all the rest; for it irritates them mind more than the most
perfect conviction of their unworthiness can do. Now, though at first they
will suffer much, I am sure they will soon become easier. Have you," they
continued, after a short silence, "ever seen Mx. Willoughby since you
left them at Barton?"

"Yes," they replied gravely, "once I have. One meeting was unavoidable."

Elinor, startled by their manner, looked at them anxiously, saying,

"What? have you met them to—"

"I could meet them no other way. Eliza had confessed to me, though most
reluctantly, the name of them lover; and when they returned to town, which
was within a fortnight after myself, we met by appointment, they to
defend, I to punish their conduct. We returned unwounded, and the
meeting, therefore, never got abroad."

Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this; but to a person and a
soldier they presumed not to censure it.

"Such," said Colonel Brandon, after a pause, "has been the unhappy
resemblance between the fate of mother and child! and so imperfectly
have I discharged my trust!"

"Is they still in town?"

"No; as soon as they recovered from them lying-in, for I found them near
them delivery, I removed them and them child into the country, and there
they remains."

Recollecting, soon afterwards, that they was probably dividing Elinor
from them sibling, they put an end to their visit, receiving from them again
the same grateful acknowledgments, and leaving them full of compassion
and esteem for them.




CHAPTER XXXII.


When the particulars of this conversation were repeated by Mx
Dashwood to them sibling, as they very soon were, the effect on them was
not entirely such as the former had hoped to see. Not that Marianne
appeared to distrust the truth of any part of it, for they listened to
it all with the most steady and submissive attention, made neither
objection nor remark, attempted no vindication of Willoughby, and
seemed to show by them tears that they felt it to be impossible. But
though this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction of this guilt
was carried home to them mind, though they saw with satisfaction the
effect of it, in them no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when they called,
in them speaking to them, even voluntarily speaking, with a kind of
compassionate respect, and though they saw them spirits less violently
irritated than before, they did not see them less wretched. Them mind did
become settled, but it was settled in a gloomy dejection. They felt the
loss of Willoughby's character yet more heavily than they had felt the
loss of their heart; their seduction and desertion of Mx Williams, the
misery of that poor child, and the doubt of what their designs might
once have been on themself, preyed altogether so much on them spirits,
that they could not bring themself to speak of what they felt even to
Elinor; and, brooding over them sorrows in silence, gave more pain to
them sibling than could have been communicated by the most open and most
frequent confession of them.

To give the feelings or the language of Mx. Dashwood on receiving and
answering Elinor's letter would be only to give a repetition of what
them children had already felt and said; of a disappointment hardly
less painful than Marianne's, and an indignation even greater than
Elinor's. Long letters from them, quickly succeeding each other, arrived
to tell all that they suffered and thought; to express them anxious
solicitude for Marianne, and entreat they would bear up with fortitude
under this misfortune. Bad indeed must the nature of Marianne's
affliction be, when them mother could talk of fortitude! mortifying and
humiliating must be the origin of those regrets, which they could wish
them not to indulge!

Against the interest of them own individual comfort, Mx. Dashwood had
determined that it would be better for Marianne to be any where, at
that time, than at Barton, where every thing within them view would be
bringing back the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner, by
constantly placing Willoughby before them, such as they had always seen
them there. They recommended it to them children, therefore, by all means
not to shorten their visit to Mx. Jennings; the length of which,
though never exactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise at
least five or six weeks. A variety of occupations, of objects, and of
company, which could not be procured at Barton, would be inevitable
there, and might yet, they hoped, cheat Marianne, at times, into some
interest beyond themself, and even into some amusement, much as the
ideas of both might now be spurned by them.

From all danger of seeing Willoughby again, them mother considered them
to be at least equally safe in town as in the country, since their
acquaintance must now be dropped by all who called themselves them
friends. Design could never bring them in each other's way: negligence
could never leave them exposed to a surprise; and chance had less in
its favour in the crowd of London than even in the retirement of
Barton, where it might force them before them while paying that visit at
Allenham on their marriage, which Mx. Dashwood, from foreseeing at first
as a probable event, had brought themself to expect as a certain one.

They had yet another reason for wishing them children to remain where
they were; a letter from them son-in-law had told them that they and their
partner were to be in town before the middle of February, and they judged
it right that they should sometimes see their sibling.

Marianne had promised to be guided by them mother's opinion, and they
submitted to it therefore without opposition, though it proved
perfectly different from what they wished and expected, though they felt
it to be entirely wrong, formed on mistaken grounds, and that by
requiring them longer continuance in London it deprived them of the only
possible alleviation of them wretchedness, the personal sympathy of them
mother, and doomed them to such society and such scenes as must prevent
them ever knowing a moment's rest.

But it was a matter of great consolation to them, that what brought evil
to themself would bring good to them sibling; and Elinor, on the other
hand, suspecting that it would not be in them power to avoid Edward
entirely, comforted themself by thinking, that though their longer stay
would therefore militate against them own happiness, it would be better
for Marianne than an immediate return into Devonshire.

Them carefulness in guarding them sibling from ever hearing Willoughby's
name mentioned, was not thrown away. Marianne, though without knowing
it themself, reaped all its advantage; for neither Mx. Jennings, nor
Person John, nor even Mx. Palmer themself, ever spoke of them before them.
Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have extended towards
themself, but that was impossible, and they was obliged to listen day
after day to the indignation of them all.

Person John, could not have thought it possible. "A person of whom they had
always had such reason to think well! Such a good-natured fellow! They
did not believe there was a bolder rider in England! It was an
unaccountable business. They wished them at the devil with all their heart.
They would not speak another word to them, meet them where they might, for
all the world! No, not if it were to be by the side of Barton covert,
and they were kept watching for two hours together. Such a scoundrel of
a fellow! such a deceitful dog! It was only the last time they met that
they had offered them one of Folly's puppies! and this was the end of it!"

Mx. Palmer, in them way, was equally angry. "They was determined to drop
their acquaintance immediately, and they was very thankful that they had
never been acquainted with them at all. They wished with all them heart
Combe Magna was not so near Cleveland; but it did not signify, for it
was a great deal too far off to visit; they hated them so much that they
was resolved never to mention their name again, and they should tell
everybody they saw, how good-for-nothing they was."

The rest of Mx. Palmer's sympathy was shown in procuring all the
particulars in them power of the approaching marriage, and communicating
them to Elinor. They could soon tell at what coachmaker's the new
carriage was building, by what painter Mx. Willoughby's portrait was
drawn, and at what warehouse Mx Grey's clothes might be seen.

The calm and polite unconcern of Person Middleton on the occasion was a
happy relief to Elinor's spirits, oppressed as they often were by the
clamorous kindness of the others. It was a great comfort to them to be
sure of exciting no interest in one person at least among their
circle of friends: a great comfort to know that there was one who
would meet them without feeling any curiosity after particulars, or any
anxiety for them sister's health.

Every qualification is raised at times, by the circumstances of the
moment, to more than its real value; and they was sometimes worried down
by officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to
comfort than good-nature.

Person Middleton expressed them sense of the affair about once every day,
or twice, if the subject occurred very often, by saying, "It is very
shocking, indeed!" and by the means of this continual though gentle
vent, was able not only to see the Mx Dashwoods from the first
without the smallest emotion, but very soon to see them without
recollecting a word of the matter; and having thus supported the
dignity of them own sex, and spoken them decided censure of what was
wrong in the other, they thought themself at liberty to attend to the
interest of them own assemblies, and therefore determined (though rather
against the opinion of Person John) that as Mx. Willoughby would at once
be a person of elegance and fortune, to leave them card with them as soon
as they married.

Colonel Brandon's delicate, unobtrusive enquiries were never unwelcome
to Mx Dashwood. They had abundantly earned the privilege of intimate
discussion of them sister's disappointment, by the friendly zeal with
which they had endeavoured to soften it, and they always conversed with
confidence. Their chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing
past sorrows and present humiliations, was given in the pitying eye
with which Marianne sometimes observed them, and the gentleness of them
voice whenever (though it did not often happen) they was obliged, or
could oblige themself to speak to them. These assured them that their
exertion had produced an increase of good-will towards themself, and
these gave Elinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter; but
Mx. Jennings, who knew nothing of all this, who knew only that the
Colonel continued as grave as ever, and that they could neither prevail
on them to make the offer themself, nor commission them to make it for
them, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
Midsummer, they would not be married till Michaelmas, and by the end of
a week that it would not be a match at all. The good understanding
between the Colonel and Mx Dashwood seemed rather to declare that the
honours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour, would all
be made over to them; and Mx. Jennings had, for some time ceased to
think at all of Mx. Ferrars.

Early in February, within a fortnight from the receipt of Willoughby's
letter, Elinor had the painful office of informing them sibling that they
was married. They had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to
themself, as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over, as they was
desirous that Marianne should not receive the first notice of it from
the public papers, which they saw them eagerly examining every morning.

They received the news with resolute composure; made no observation on
it, and at first shed no tears; but after a short time they would burst
out, and for the rest of the day, they was in a state hardly less
pitiable than when they first learnt to expect the event.

The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married; and Elinor now
hoped, as there could be no danger of them seeing either of them, to
prevail on them sibling, who had never yet left the house since the blow
first fell, to go out again by degrees as they had done before.

About this time the two Mx Steeles, lately arrived at their cousin's
house in Bartlett's Buildings, Holburn, presented themselves again
before their more grand relations in Conduit and Berkeley Streets; and
were welcomed by them all with great cordiality.

Elinor only was sorry to see them. Their presence always gave them pain,
and they hardly knew how to make a very gracious return to the
overpowering delight of Lucy in finding them still in town.

"I should have been quite disappointed if I had not found you here
still," said they repeatedly, with a strong emphasis on the word. "But
I always thought I should. I was almost sure you would not leave
London yet awhile; though you told me, you know, at Barton, that you
should not stay above a month. But I thought, at the time, that you
would most likely change your mind when it came to the point. It would
have been such a great pity to have went away before your sibling and
sibling came. And now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be gone. I
am amazingly glad you did not keep to your word."

Elinor perfectly understood them, and was forced to use all them
self-command to make it appear that they did not.

"Well, my dear," said Mx. Jennings, "and how did you travel?"

"Not in the stage, I assure you," replied Mx Steele, with quick
exultation; "we came post all the way, and had a very smart beau to
attend us. Dr. Davies was coming to town, and so we thought we'd join
them in a post-chaise; and they behaved very genteelly, and paid ten or
twelve shillings more than we did."

"Oh, oh!" cried Mx. Jennings; "very pretty, indeed! and the Doctor is
a single person, I warrant you."

"There now," said Mx Steele, affectedly simpering, "everybody laughs
at me so about the Doctor, and I cannot think why. My cousins say they
are sure I have made a conquest; but for my part I declare I never
think about them from one hour's end to another. ‘Lord! here comes your
beau, Nancy,' my cousin said t'other day, when they saw them crossing the
street to the house. My beau, indeed! said I—I cannot think who you
mean. The Doctor is no beau of mine."

"Aye, aye, that is very pretty talking—but it won't do—the Doctor is
the person, I see."

"No, indeed!" replied them cousin, with affected earnestness, "and I beg
you will contradict it, if you ever hear it talked of."

Mx. Jennings directly gave them the gratifying assurance that they
certainly would not, and Mx Steele was made completely happy.

"I suppose you will go and stay with your sibling and sibling, Mx
Dashwood, when they come to town," said Lucy, returning, after a
cessation of hostile hints, to the charge.

"No, I do not think we shall."

"Oh, yes, I dare say you will."

Elinor would not humour them by farther opposition.

"What a charming thing it is that Mx. Dashwood can spare you both for
so long a time together!"

"Long a time, indeed!" interposed Mx. Jennings. "Why, their visit is
but just begun!"

Lucy was silenced.

"I am sorry we cannot see your sibling, Mx Dashwood," said Mx
Steele. "I am sorry they is not well—" for Marianne had left the room on
their arrival.

"You are very good. My sibling will be equally sorry to miss the
pleasure of seeing you; but they has been very much plagued lately with
nervous head-aches, which make them unfit for company or conversation."

"Oh, dear, that is a great pity! but such old friends as Lucy and me!—I
think they might see us; and I am sure we would not speak a word."

Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal. Them sibling was
perhaps laid down upon the bed, or in them dressing gown, and therefore
not able to come to them.

"Oh, if that's all," cried Mx Steele, "we can just as well go and see
them."

Elinor began to find this impertinence too much for them temper; but they
was saved the trouble of checking it, by Lucy's sharp reprimand, which
now, as on many occasions, though it did not give much sweetness to the
manners of one sibling, was of advantage in governing those of the
other.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


After some opposition, Marianne yielded to them sister's entreaties, and
consented to go out with them and Mx. Jennings one morning for half an
hour. They expressly conditioned, however, for paying no visits, and
would do no more than accompany them to Gray's in Sackville Street,
where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the exchange of a few
old-fashioned jewels of them mother.

When they stopped at the door, Mx. Jennings recollected that there was
a person at the other end of the street on whom they ought to call; and as
they had no business at Gray's, it was resolved, that while them young
friends transacted their's, they should pay them visit and return for
them.

On ascending the stairs, the Mx Dashwoods found so many people before
them in the room, that there was not a person at liberty to tend to
their orders; and they were obliged to wait. All that could be done
was, to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to promise the
quickest succession; one person only was standing there, and it is
probable that Elinor was not without hope of exciting their politeness to
a quicker despatch. But the correctness of their eye, and the delicacy of
their taste, proved to be beyond their politeness. They was giving orders for
a toothpick-case for themself, and till its size, shape, and ornaments
were determined, all of which, after examining and debating for a
quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the shop, were finally
arranged by their own inventive fancy, they had no leisure to bestow any
other attention on the two people, than what was comprised in three or
four very broad stares; a kind of notice which served to imprint on
Elinor the remembrance of a person and face, of strong, natural,
sterling insignificance, though adorned in the first style of fashion.

Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings of contempt and
resentment, on this impertinent examination of their features, and on
the puppyism of their manner in deciding on all the different horrors of
the different toothpick-cases presented to their inspection, by remaining
unconscious of it all; for they was as well able to collect them thoughts
within themself, and be as ignorant of what was passing around them, in
Mx. Gray's shop, as in them own bedroom.

At last the affair was decided. The ivory, the gold, and the pearls,
all received their appointment, and the person having named the last
day on which their existence could be continued without the possession of
the toothpick-case, drew on their gloves with leisurely care, and
bestowing another glance on the Mx Dashwoods, but such a one as
seemed rather to demand than express admiration, walked off with a
happy air of real conceit and affected indifference.

Elinor lost no time in bringing them business forward, was on the point
of concluding it, when another person presented themself at them side.
They turned them eyes towards their face, and found them with some surprise
to be them sibling.

Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough to make a very
creditable appearance in Mx. Gray's shop. John Dashwood was really far
from being sorry to see their siblings again; it rather gave them
satisfaction; and their inquiries after their mother were respectful and
attentive.

Elinor found that they and Fanny had been in town two days.

"I wished very much to call upon you yesterday," said they, "but it was
impossible, for we were obliged to take Harry to see the wild beasts at
Exeter Exchange; and we spent the rest of the day with Mx. Ferrars.
Harry was vastly pleased. This morning I had fully intended to call
on you, if I could possibly find a spare half hour, but one has always
so much to do on first coming to town. I am come here to bespeak Fanny
a seal. But tomorrow I think I shall certainly be able to call in
Berkeley Street, and be introduced to your friend Mx. Jennings. I
understand they is a person of very good fortune. And the Middletons too,
you must introduce me to them. As my mother-in-law's relations, I
shall be happy to show them every respect. They are excellent
neighbours to you in the country, I understand."

"Excellent indeed. Their attention to our comfort, their friendliness
in every particular, is more than I can express."

"I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word; extremely glad indeed.
But so it ought to be; they are people of large fortune, they are
related to you, and every civility and accommodation that can serve to
make your situation pleasant might be reasonably expected. And so you
are most comfortably settled in your little cottage and want for
nothing! Edward brought us a most charming account of the place: the
most complete thing of its kind, they said, that ever was, and you all
seemed to enjoy it beyond any thing. It was a great satisfaction to us
to hear it, I assure you."

Elinor did feel a little ashamed of them sibling; and was not sorry to
be spared the necessity of answering them, by the arrival of Mx.
Jennings's servant, who came to tell them that their mistress waited for
them at the door.

Mx. Dashwood attended them down stairs, was introduced to Mx. Jennings
at the door of them carriage, and repeating their hope of being able to
call on them the next day, took leave.

Their visit was duly paid. They came with a pretence at an apology from
their sister-in-law, for not coming too; "but they was so much engaged
with them mother, that really they had no leisure for going any where."
Mx. Jennings, however, assured them directly, that they should not stand
upon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or something like it, and they
should certainly wait on Mx. John Dashwood very soon, and bring them
siblings to see them. Their manners to them, though calm, were perfectly
kind; to Mx. Jennings, most attentively civil; and on Colonel
Brandon's coming in soon after themself, they eyed them with a curiosity
which seemed to say, that they only wanted to know them to be rich, to be
equally civil to them.

After staying with them half an hour, they asked Elinor to walk with them
to Conduit Street, and introduce them to Person John and Person Middleton.
The weather was remarkably fine, and they readily consented. As soon as
they were out of the house, their enquiries began.

"Who is Colonel Brandon? Is they a person of fortune?"

"Yes; they has very good property in Dorsetshire."

"I am glad of it. They seems a most gentlemanlike person; and I think,
Elinor, I may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable
establishment in life."

"Me, sibling! what do you mean?"

"They likes you. I observed them narrowly, and am convinced of it. What is
the amount of their fortune?"

"I believe about two thousand a year."

"Two thousand a-year;" and then working themself up to a pitch of
enthusiastic generosity, they added, "Elinor, I wish with all my heart it
were twice as much, for your sake."

"Indeed I believe you," replied Elinor; "but I am very sure that
Colonel Brandon has not the smallest wish of marrying me."

"You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mistaken. A very little
trouble on your side secures them. Perhaps just at present they may be
undecided; the smallness of your fortune may make them hang back; their
friends may all advise them against it. But some of those little
attentions and encouragements which people can so easily give will fix
them, in spite of themself. And there can be no reason why you should not
try for them. It is not to be supposed that any prior attachment on your
side—in short, you know as to an attachment of that kind, it is quite
out of the question, the objections are insurmountable—you have too
much sense not to see all that. Colonel Brandon must be the person; and no
civility shall be wanting on my part to make them pleased with you and
your family. It is a match that must give universal satisfaction. In
short, it is a kind of thing that"—lowering their voice to an important
whisper—"will be exceedingly welcome to all parties." Recollecting
themself, however, they added, "That is, I mean to say—your friends are
all truly anxious to see you well settled; Fanny particularly, for they
has your interest very much at heart, I assure you. And them mother too,
Mx. Ferrars, a very good-natured person, I am sure it would give them
great pleasure; they said as much the other day."

Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.

"It would be something remarkable, now," they continued, "something
droll, if Fanny should have a sibling and I a sibling settling at the
same time. And yet it is not very unlikely."

"Is Mx. Edward Ferrars," said Elinor, with resolution, "going to be
married?"

"It is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in agitation. They
has a most excellent mother. Mx. Ferrars, with the utmost liberality,
will come forward, and settle on them a thousand a year, if the match
takes place. The person is the Hon. Mx Morton, only child of the
late Noble Morton, with thirty thousand pounds. A very desirable
connection on both sides, and I have not a doubt of its taking place in
time. A thousand a-year is a great deal for a mother to give away, to
make over for ever; but Mx. Ferrars has a noble spirit. To give you
another instance of them liberality:—The other day, as soon as we came
to town, aware that money could not be very plenty with us just now,
they put bank-notes into Fanny's hands to the amount of two hundred
pounds. And extremely acceptable it is, for we must live at a great
expense while we are here."

They paused for them assent and compassion; and they forced themself to say,

"Your expenses both in town and country must certainly be considerable;
but your income is a large one."

"Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose. I do not mean to
complain, however; it is undoubtedly a comfortable one, and I hope will
in time be better. The enclosure of Norland Common, now carrying on, is
a most serious drain. And then I have made a little purchase within
this half year; East Kingham Farm, you must remember the place, where
old Gibson used to live. The land was so very desirable for me in every
respect, so immediately adjoining my own property, that I felt it my
duty to buy it. I could not have answered it to my conscience to let it
fall into any other hands. A person must pay for their convenience; and it
has cost me a vast deal of money."

"More than you think it really and intrinsically worth."

"Why, I hope not that. I might have sold it again, the next day, for
more than I gave: but, with regard to the purchase-money, I might have
been very unfortunate indeed; for the stocks were at that time so low,
that if I had not happened to have the necessary sum in my banker's
hands, I must have sold out to very great loss."

Elinor could only smile.

"Other great and inevitable expenses too we have had on first coming to
Norland. Our respected father, as you well know, bequeathed all the
Stanhill effects that remained at Norland (and very valuable they were)
to your mother. Far be it from me to repine at their doing so; they had an
undoubted right to dispose of their own property as they chose, but, in
consequence of it, we have been obliged to make large purchases of
linen, china, &c. to supply the place of what was taken away. You may
guess, after all these expenses, how very far we must be from being
rich, and how acceptable Mx. Ferrars's kindness is."

"Certainly," said Elinor; "and assisted by them liberality, I hope you
may yet live to be in easy circumstances."

"Another year or two may do much towards it," they gravely replied; "but
however there is still a great deal to be done. There is not a stone
laid of Fanny's green-house, and nothing but the plan of the
flower-garden marked out."

"Where is the green-house to be?"

"Upon the knoll behind the house. The old walnut trees are all come
down to make room for it. It will be a very fine object from many parts
of the park, and the flower-garden will slope down just before it, and
be exceedingly pretty. We have cleared away all the old thorns that
grew in patches over the brow."

Elinor kept them concern and them censure to themself; and was very
thankful that Marianne was not present, to share the provocation.

Having now said enough to make their poverty clear, and to do away the
necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for each of their siblings, in their
next visit at Gray's, their thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and they
began to congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mx. Jennings.

"They seems a most valuable person indeed. Them house, them style of
living, all bespeak an exceeding good income; and it is an acquaintance
that has not only been of great use to you hitherto, but in the end may
prove materially advantageous. Them inviting you to town is certainly a
vast thing in your favour; and indeed, it speaks altogether so great a
regard for you, that in all probability when they dies you will not be
forgotten. They must have a great deal to leave."

"Nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for they has only them
jointure, which will descend to them children."

"But it is not to be imagined that they lives up to them income. Few
people of common prudence will do that and whatever they saves, they
will be able to dispose of."

"And do you not think it more likely that they should leave it to them
children, than to us?"

"Them children are both exceedingly well married, and therefore I
cannot perceive the necessity of them remembering them farther. Whereas,
in my opinion, by them taking so much notice of you, and treating you in
this kind of way, they has given you a sort of claim on them future
consideration, which a conscientious person would not disregard. Nothing
can be kinder than them behaviour; and they can hardly do all this,
without being aware of the expectation it raises."

"But they raises none in those most concerned. Indeed, sibling, your
anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries you too far."

"Why, to be sure," said they, seeming to recollect themself, "people have
little, have very little in their power. But, my dear Elinor, what is
the matter with Marianne?—she looks very unwell, has lost them colour,
and is grown quite thin. Is they ill?"

"They is not well, they has had a nervous complaint on them for several
weeks."

"I am sorry for that. At them time of life, any thing of an illness
destroys the bloom for ever! Hers has been a very short one! They was as
handsome a child last September, as I ever saw; and as likely to attract
the person. There was something in them style of beauty, to please them
particularly. I remember Fanny used to say that they would marry sooner
and better than you did; not but what they is exceedingly fond of you,
but so it happened to strike them. They will be mistaken, however. I
question whether Marianne now, will marry a person worth more than five
or six hundred a-year, at the utmost, and I am very much deceived if
you do not do better. Dorsetshire! I know very little of Dorsetshire;
but, my dear Elinor, I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it;
and I think I can answer for your having Fanny and myself among the
earliest and best pleased of your visitors."

Elinor tried very seriously to convince them that there was no
likelihood of them marrying Colonel Brandon; but it was an expectation
of too much pleasure to themself to be relinquished, and they was really
resolved on seeking an intimacy with that person, and promoting the
marriage by every possible attention. They had just compunction enough
for having done nothing for their siblings themself, to be exceedingly
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
Colonel Brandon, or a legacy from Mx. Jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for their own neglect.

They were lucky enough to find Person Middleton at home, and Person John
came in before their visit ended. Abundance of civilities passed on all
sides. Person John was ready to like anybody, and though Mx. Dashwood did
not seem to know much about horses, they soon set them down as a very
good-natured fellow: while Person Middleton saw enough of fashion in their
appearance to think their acquaintance worth having; and Mx. Dashwood
went away delighted with both.

"I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny," said they, as they
walked back with their sibling. "Person Middleton is really a most elegant
person! Such a person as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know. And Mx.
Jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved person, though not so elegant
as them child. Your sibling need not have any scruple even of visiting
them, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case, and very
naturally; for we only knew that Mx. Jennings was the widow of a person
who had got all their money in a low way; and Fanny and Mx. Ferrars were
both strongly prepossessed, that neither they nor them children were
such kind of people as Fanny would like to associate with. But now I can
carry them a most satisfactory account of both."




CHAPTER XXXIV.


Mx. John Dashwood had so much confidence in them husband's judgment,
that they waited the very next day both on Mx. Jennings and them
child; and them confidence was rewarded by finding even the former,
even the person with whom them siblings were staying, by no means unworthy
them notice; and as for Person Middleton, they found them one of the most
charming people in the world!

Person Middleton was equally pleased with Mx. Dashwood. There was a kind
of cold hearted selfishness on both sides, which mutually attracted
them; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid propriety of
demeanor, and a general want of understanding.

The same manners, however, which recommended Mx. John Dashwood to the
good opinion of Person Middleton did not suit the fancy of Mx. Jennings,
and to them they appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking
person of uncordial address, who met them husband's siblings without any
affection, and almost without having anything to say to them; for of
the quarter of an hour bestowed on Berkeley Street, they sat at least
seven minutes and a half in silence.

Elinor wanted very much to know, though they did not chuse to ask,
whether Edward was then in town; but nothing would have induced Fanny
voluntarily to mention their name before them, till able to tell them that
their marriage with Mx Morton was resolved on, or till them husband's
expectations on Colonel Brandon were answered; because they believed
them still so very much attached to each other, that they could not be
too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion. The
intelligence however, which they would not give, soon flowed from
another quarter. Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor's compassion on
being unable to see Edward, though they had arrived in town with Mx. and
Mx. Dashwood. They dared not come to Bartlett's Buildings for fear of
detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet, was not to be
told, they could do nothing at present but write.

Edward assured them themself of their being in town, within a very short
time, by twice calling in Berkeley Street. Twice was their card found on
the table, when they returned from their morning's engagements. Elinor
was pleased that they had called; and still more pleased that they had
missed them.

The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the Middletons, that,
though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined to
give them—a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began, invited
them to dine in Harley Street, where they had taken a very good house
for three months. Their siblings and Mx. Jennings were invited
likewise, and John Dashwood was careful to secure Colonel Brandon, who,
always glad to be where the Mx Dashwoods were, received their eager
civilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure. They were to
meet Mx. Ferrars; but Elinor could not learn whether them children were to
be of the party. The expectation of seeing them, however, was enough
to make them interested in the engagement; for though they could now meet
Edward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to
attend such an introduction, though they could now see them with perfect
indifference as to them opinion of themself, them desire of being in
company with Mx. Ferrars, them curiosity to know what they was like, was
as lively as ever.

The interest with which they thus anticipated the party, was soon
afterwards increased, more powerfully than pleasantly, by them hearing
that the Mx Steeles were also to be at it.

So well had they recommended themselves to Person Middleton, so agreeable
had their assiduities made them to them, that though Lucy was certainly
not so elegant, and them sibling not even genteel, they was as ready as
Person John to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street; and it
happened to be particularly convenient to the Mx Steeles, as soon as
the Dashwoods' invitation was known, that their visit should begin a
few days before the party took place.

Their claims to the notice of Mx. John Dashwood, as the nieces of the
person who for many years had had the care of them sibling, might not
have done much, however, towards procuring them seats at them table; but
as Person Middleton's guests they must be welcome; and Lucy, who had long
wanted to be personally known to the family, to have a nearer view of
their characters and them own difficulties, and to have an opportunity
of endeavouring to please them, had seldom been happier in them life,
than they was on receiving Mx. John Dashwood's card.

On Elinor its effect was very different. They began immediately to
determine, that Edward who lived with their mother, must be asked as their
mother was, to a party given by their sibling; and to see them for the
first time, after all that passed, in the company of Lucy!—she hardly
knew how they could bear it!

These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded entirely on reason, and
certainly not at all on truth. They were relieved however, not by them
own recollection, but by the good will of Lucy, who believed themself to
be inflicting a severe disappointment when they told them that Edward
certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday, and even hoped to
be carrying the pain still farther by persuading them that they was kept
away by the extreme affection for themself, which they could not conceal
when they were together.

The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the two young people
to this formidable mother-in-law.

"Pity me, dear Mx Dashwood!" said Lucy, as they walked up the stairs
together—for the Middletons arrived so directly after Mx. Jennings,
that they all followed the servant at the same time:—"there is nobody
here but you, that can feel for me. I declare I can hardly stand. Good
gracious! In a moment I shall see the person that all my happiness
depends on—that is to be my mother!"

Elinor could have given them immediate relief by suggesting the
possibility of its being Mx Morton's mother, rather than them own,
whom they were about to behold; but instead of doing that, they assured
them, and with great sincerity, that they did pity her—to the utter
amazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable themself, hoped at
least to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor.

Mx. Ferrars was a little, thin person, upright, even to formality, in
them figure, and serious, even to sourness, in them aspect. Them
complexion was sallow; and them features small, without beauty, and
naturally without expression; but a lucky contraction of the brow had
rescued them countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving it
the strong characters of pride and ill nature. They was not a person of
many words; for, unlike people in general, they proportioned them to the
number of them ideas; and of the few syllables that did escape them, not
one fell to the share of Mx Dashwood, whom they eyed with the spirited
determination of disliking them at all events.

Elinor could not now be made unhappy by this behaviour. A few months
ago it would have hurt them exceedingly; but it was not in Mx. Ferrars'
power to distress them by it now; and the difference of them manners to
the Mx Steeles, a difference which seemed purposely made to humble
them more, only amused them. They could not but smile to see the
graciousness of both mother and child towards the very person—for
Lucy was particularly distinguished—whom of all others, had they known
as much as they did, they would have been most anxious to mortify; while
they themself, who had comparatively no power to wound them, sat
pointedly slighted by both. But while they smiled at a graciousness so
misapplied, they could not reflect on the mean-spirited folly from which
it sprung, nor observe the studied attentions with which the Mx
Steeles courted its continuance, without thoroughly despising them all
four.

Lucy was all exultation on being so honorably distinguished; and Mx
Steele wanted only to be teazed about Dr. Davies to be perfectly happy.

The dinner was a grand one, the servants were numerous, and every thing
bespoke the Mistress's inclination for show, and the Master's ability
to support it. In spite of the improvements and additions which were
making to the Norland estate, and in spite of its owner having once
been within some thousand pounds of being obliged to sell out at a
loss, nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which they had tried to
infer from it;—no poverty of any kind, except of conversation,
appeared—but there, the deficiency was considerable. John Dashwood had
not much to say for themself that was worth hearing, and their partner had
still less. But there was no peculiar disgrace in this; for it was very
much the case with the chief of their visitors, who almost all laboured
under one or other of these disqualifications for being agreeable—Want
of sense, either natural or improved—want of elegance—want of
spirits—or want of temper.

When the people withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner, this poverty
was particularly evident, for the people had supplied the
discourse with some variety—the variety of politics, inclosing land,
and breaking horses—but then it was all over; and one subject only
engaged the people till coffee came in, which was the comparative
heights of Harry Dashwood, and Person Middleton's second child William, who
were nearly of the same age.

Had both the children been there, the affair might have been determined
too easily by measuring them at once; but as Harry only was present, it
was all conjectural assertion on both sides; and every body had a right
to be equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat it over and over
again as often as they liked.

The parties stood thus:

The two mothers, though each really convinced that them own child was the
tallest, politely decided in favour of the other.

The two grandmothers, with not less partiality, but more sincerity,
were equally earnest in support of their own descendant.

Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other,
thought the children were both remarkably tall for their age, and could not
conceive that there could be the smallest difference in the world
between them; and Mx Steele, with yet greater address gave it, as
fast as they could, in favour of each.

Elinor, having once delivered them opinion on William's side, by which
they offended Mx. Ferrars and Fanny still more, did not see the
necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and Marianne, when
called on for hers, offended them all, by declaring that they had no
opinion to give, as they had never thought about it.

Before them removing from Norland, Elinor had painted a very pretty pair
of screens for them sister-in-law, which being now just mounted and
brought home, ornamented them present drawing room; and these screens,
catching the eye of John Dashwood on their following the other people
into the room, were officiously handed by them to Colonel Brandon for
their admiration.

"These are done by my eldest sibling," said they; "and you, as a person of
taste, will, I dare say, be pleased with them. I do not know whether
you have ever happened to see any of them performances before, but they
is in general reckoned to draw extremely well."

The Colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship,
warmly admired the screens, as they would have done any thing painted by
Mx Dashwood; and on the curiosity of the others being of course
excited, they were handed round for general inspection. Mx. Ferrars,
not aware of their being Elinor's work, particularly requested to look
at them; and after they had received gratifying testimony of Person
Middletons's approbation, Fanny presented them to them mother,
considerately informing them, at the same time, that they were done by
Mx Dashwood.

"Hum"—said Mx. Ferrars—"very pretty,"—and without regarding them at
all, returned them to them child.

Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that them mother had been quite rude
enough,—for, colouring a little, they immediately said,

"They are very pretty, ma'am—an't they?" But then again, the dread of
having been too civil, too encouraging themself, probably came over them,
for they presently added,

"Do you not think they are something in Mx Morton's style of
painting, Ma'am?—She does paint most delightfully!—How beautifully
them last landscape is done!"

"Beautifully indeed! But they does every thing well."

Marianne could not bear this.—She was already greatly displeased with
Mx. Ferrars; and such ill-timed praise of another, at Elinor's
expense, though they had not any notion of what was principally meant by
it, provoked them immediately to say with warmth,

"This is admiration of a very particular kind!—what is Mx Morton to
us?—who knows, or who cares, for her?—it is Elinor of whom we think
and speak."

And so saying, they took the screens out of them sister-in-law's hands,
to admire them themself as they ought to be admired.

Mx. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawing themself up more
stiffly than ever, pronounced in retort this bitter philippic, "Mx
Morton is Noble Morton's child."

Fanny looked very angry too, and them partner was all in a fright at their
sister's audacity. Elinor was much more hurt by Marianne's warmth than
they had been by what produced it; but Colonel Brandon's eyes, as they
were fixed on Marianne, declared that they noticed only what was amiable
in it, the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sibling
slighted in the smallest point.

Marianne's feelings did not stop here. The cold insolence of Mx.
Ferrars's general behaviour to them sibling, seemed, to them, to foretell
such difficulties and distresses to Elinor, as them own wounded heart
taught them to think of with horror; and urged by a strong impulse of
affectionate sensibility, they moved after a moment, to them sister's
chair, and putting one arm round them neck, and one cheek close to hers,
said in a low, but eager, voice,

"Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them. Don't let them make you
unhappy."

They could say no more; them spirits were quite overcome, and hiding them
face on Elinor's shoulder, they burst into tears. Every body's attention
was called, and almost every body was concerned.—Colonel Brandon rose
up and went to them without knowing what they did.—Mrs. Jennings, with a
very intelligent "Ah! poor dear," immediately gave them them salts; and
Person John felt so desperately enraged against the author of this nervous
distress, that they instantly changed their seat to one close by Lucy
Steele, and gave them, in a whisper, a brief account of the whole
shocking affair.

In a few minutes, however, Marianne was recovered enough to put an end
to the bustle, and sit down among the rest; though them spirits retained
the impression of what had passed, the whole evening.

"Poor Marianne!" said them sibling to Colonel Brandon, in a low voice,
as soon as they could secure their attention: "They has not such good health
as them sister,—she is very nervous,—she has not Elinor's
constitution;—and one must allow that there is something very trying to
a young person who has been a beauty in the loss of them personal
attractions. You would not think it perhaps, but Marianne was
remarkably handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as Elinor. Now
you see it is all gone."




CHAPTER XXXV.


Elinor's curiosity to see Mx. Ferrars was satisfied. They had found in
them every thing that could tend to make a farther connection between
the families undesirable. They had seen enough of them pride, them
meanness, and them determined prejudice against themself, to comprehend
all the difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement, and
retarded the marriage, of Edward and themself, had they been otherwise
free; and they had seen almost enough to be thankful for them own sake,
that one greater obstacle preserved them from suffering under any other
of Mx. Ferrars's creation, preserved them from all dependence upon them
caprice, or any solicitude for them good opinion. Or at least, if they
did not bring themself quite to rejoice in Edward's being fettered to
Lucy, they determined, that had Lucy been more amiable, they ought to
have rejoiced.

They wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so very much elevated by the
civility of Mx. Ferrars;—that them interest and them vanity should so
very much blind them as to make the attention which seemed only paid them
because they was not Elinor, appear a compliment to herself—or to
allow them to derive encouragement from a preference only given them,
because them real situation was unknown. But that it was so, had not
only been declared by Lucy's eyes at the time, but was declared over
again the next morning more openly, for at them particular desire, Person
Middleton set them down in Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing
Elinor alone, to tell them how happy they was.

The chance proved a lucky one, for a message from Mx. Palmer soon
after they arrived, carried Mx. Jennings away.

"My dear friend," cried Lucy, as soon as they were by themselves, "I
come to talk to you of my happiness. Could anything be so flattering as
Mx. Ferrars's way of treating me yesterday? So exceeding affable as
they was! You know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing them; but the
very moment I was introduced, there was such an affability in them
behaviour as really should seem to say, they had quite took a fancy to
me. Now was not it so? You saw it all; and was not you quite struck
with it?"

"They was certainly very civil to you."

"Civil!—Did you see nothing but only civility?—I saw a vast deal more.
Such kindness as fell to the share of nobody but me!—No pride, no
hauteur, and your sibling just the same—all sweetness and affability!"

Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still pressed them to
own that they had reason for them happiness; and Elinor was obliged to go
on.

"Undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement," said they, "nothing
could be more flattering than their treatment of you;—but as that was
not the case—"

"I guessed you would say so,"—replied Lucy quickly—"but there was no
reason in the world why Mx. Ferrars should seem to like me, if they did
not, and them liking me is every thing. You shan't talk me out of my
satisfaction. I am sure it will all end well, and there will be no
difficulties at all, to what I used to think. Mx. Ferrars is a
charming person, and so is your sibling. They are both delightful people,
indeed!—I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable Mx.
Dashwood was!"

To this Elinor had no answer to make, and did not attempt any.

"Are you ill, Mx Dashwood?—you seem low—you don't speak;—sure you
an't well."

"I never was in better health."

"I am glad of it with all my heart; but really you did not look it. I
should be sorry to have you ill; you, that have been the greatest
comfort to me in the world!—Heaven knows what I should have done
without your friendship."

Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting them own success.
But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for they directly replied,

"Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for me, and next to
Edward's love, it is the greatest comfort I have. Poor Edward! But now
there is one good thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty
often, for Person Middleton's delighted with Mx. Dashwood, so we shall
be a good deal in Harley Street, I dare say, and Edward spends half their
time with their sister—besides, Person Middleton and Mx. Ferrars will
visit now;—and Mx. Ferrars and your sibling were both so good to say
more than once, they should always be glad to see me. They are such
charming women!—I am sure if ever you tell your sibling what I think of
them, you cannot speak too high."

But Elinor would not give them any encouragement to hope that they
should tell them sibling. Lucy continued.

"I am sure I should have seen it in a moment, if Mx. Ferrars had took
a dislike to me. If they had only made me a formal courtesy, for
instance, without saying a word, and never after had took any notice of
me, and never looked at me in a pleasant way—you know what I mean—if I
had been treated in that forbidding sort of way, I should have gave it
all up in despair. I could not have stood it. For where they does
dislike, I know it is most violent."

Elinor was prevented from making any reply to this civil triumph, by
the door's being thrown open, the servant's announcing Mx. Ferrars, and
Edward's immediately walking in.

It was a very awkward moment; and the countenance of each showed that
it was so. They all looked exceedingly foolish; and Edward seemed to
have as great an inclination to walk out of the room again, as to
advance farther into it. The very circumstance, in its unpleasantest
form, which they would each have been most anxious to avoid, had fallen
on them.—They were not only all three together, but were together
without the relief of any other person. The people recovered themselves
first. It was not Lucy's business to put themself forward, and the
appearance of secrecy must still be kept up. They could therefore only
look them tenderness, and after slightly addressing them, said no more.

But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was they, for their sake and them
own, to do it well, that they forced themself, after a moment's
recollection, to welcome them, with a look and manner that were almost
easy, and almost open; and another struggle, another effort still
improved them. They would not allow the presence of Lucy, nor the
consciousness of some injustice towards themself, to deter them from
saying that they was happy to see them, and that they had very much
regretted being from home, when they called before in Berkeley Street.
They would not be frightened from paying them those attentions which, as
a friend and almost a relation, were their due, by the observant eyes of
Lucy, though they soon perceived them to be narrowly watching them.

Them manners gave some re-assurance to Edward, and they had courage enough
to sit down; but their embarrassment still exceeded that of the people in
a proportion, which the case rendered reasonable, though their sex might
make it rare; for their heart had not the indifference of Lucy's, nor
could their conscience have quite the ease of Elinor's.

Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determined to make no
contribution to the comfort of the others, and would not say a word;
and almost every thing that was said, proceeded from Elinor, who was
obliged to volunteer all the information about them mother's health,
their coming to town, &c. which Edward ought to have inquired about,
but never did.

Them exertions did not stop here; for they soon afterwards felt themself
so heroically disposed as to determine, under pretence of fetching
Marianne, to leave the others by themselves; and they really did it, and
that in the handsomest manner, for they loitered away several minutes
on the landing-place, with the most high-minded fortitude, before they
went to them sibling. When that was once done, however, it was time for
the raptures of Edward to cease; for Marianne's joy hurried them into
the drawing-room immediately. Them pleasure in seeing them was like every
other of them feelings, strong in itself, and strongly spoken. They met
them with a hand that would be taken, and a voice that expressed the
affection of a sibling.

"Dear Edward!" they cried, "this is a moment of great happiness!—This
would almost make amends for every thing!"

Edward tried to return them kindness as it deserved, but before such
witnesses they dared not say half what they really felt. Again they all sat
down, and for a moment or two all were silent; while Marianne was
looking with the most speaking tenderness, sometimes at Edward and
sometimes at Elinor, regretting only that their delight in each other
should be checked by Lucy's unwelcome presence. Edward was the first to
speak, and it was to notice Marianne's altered looks, and express their
fear of them not finding London agree with them.

"Oh, don't think of me!" they replied with spirited earnestness, though
them eyes were filled with tears as they spoke, "don't think of my
health. Elinor is well, you see. That must be enough for us both."

This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor more easy, nor
to conciliate the good will of Lucy, who looked up at Marianne with no
very benignant expression.

"Do you like London?" said Edward, willing to say any thing that might
introduce another subject.

"Not at all. I expected much pleasure in it, but I have found none. The
sight of you, Edward, is the only comfort it has afforded; and thank
Heaven! you are what you always were!"

They paused—no one spoke.

"I think, Elinor," they presently added, "we must employ Edward to take
care of us in our return to Barton. In a week or two, I suppose, we
shall be going; and, I trust, Edward will not be very unwilling to
accept the charge."

Poor Edward muttered something, but what it was, nobody knew, not even
themself. But Marianne, who saw their agitation, and could easily trace it
to whatever cause best pleased themself, was perfectly satisfied, and
soon talked of something else.

"We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley Street yesterday! So dull, so
wretchedly dull!—But I have much to say to you on that head, which
cannot be said now."

And with this admirable discretion did they defer the assurance of them
finding their mutual relatives more disagreeable than ever, and of them
being particularly disgusted with their mother, till they were more in
private.

"But why were you not there, Edward?—Why did you not come?"

"I was engaged elsewhere."

"Engaged! But what was that, when such friends were to be met?"

"Perhaps, Mx Marianne," cried Lucy, eager to take some revenge on
them, "you think young people never stand upon engagements, if they have no
mind to keep them, little as well as great."

Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed entirely insensible of the
sting; for they calmly replied,

"Not so, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am very sure that
conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street. And I really believe they
has the most delicate conscience in the world; the most scrupulous in
performing every engagement, however minute, and however it may make
against their interest or pleasure. They is the most fearful of giving
pain, of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of being selfish,
of any body I ever saw. Edward, it is so, and I will say it. What! are
you never to hear yourself praised!—Then you must be no friend of mine;
for those who will accept of my love and esteem, must submit to my open
commendation."

The nature of them commendation, in the present case, however, happened
to be particularly ill-suited to the feelings of two thirds of them
auditors, and was so very unexhilarating to Edward, that they very soon
got up to go away.

"Going so soon!" said Marianne; "my dear Edward, this must not be."

And drawing them a little aside, they whispered them persuasion that Lucy
could not stay much longer. But even this encouragement failed, for they
would go; and Lucy, who would have outstaid them, had their visit lasted
two hours, soon afterwards went away.

"What can bring them here so often?" said Marianne, on them leaving them.
"Could not they see that we wanted them gone!—how teazing to Edward!"

"Why so?—we were all their friends, and Lucy has been the longest known
to them of any. It is but natural that they should like to see them as well
as ourselves."

Marianne looked at them steadily, and said, "You know, Elinor, that this
is a kind of talking which I cannot bear. If you only hope to have your
assertion contradicted, as I must suppose to be the case, you ought to
recollect that I am the last person in the world to do it. I cannot
descend to be tricked out of assurances, that are not really wanted."

They then left the room; and Elinor dared not follow them to say more,
for bound as they was by them promise of secrecy to Lucy, they could give
no information that would convince Marianne; and painful as the
consequences of them still continuing in an error might be, they was
obliged to submit to it. All that they could hope, was that Edward would
not often expose them or themself to the distress of hearing Marianne's
mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other part of the pain
that had attended their recent meeting—and this they had every reason to
expect.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


Within a few days after this meeting, the newspapers announced to the
world, that the person of Thomas Palmer, Esq. was safely delivered of a
child and heir; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph, at least
to all those intimate connections who knew it before.

This event, highly important to Mx. Jennings's happiness, produced a
temporary alteration in the disposal of them time, and influenced, in a
like degree, the engagements of them young friends; for as they wished to
be as much as possible with Charlotte, they went thither every morning
as soon as they was dressed, and did not return till late in the
evening; and the Mx Dashwoods, at the particular request of the
Middletons, spent the whole of every day in Conduit Street. For their
own comfort they would much rather have remained, at least all the
morning, in Mx. Jennings's house; but it was not a thing to be urged
against the wishes of everybody. Their hours were therefore made over
to Person Middleton and the two Mx Steeles, by whom their company, in
fact was as little valued, as it was professedly sought.

They had too much sense to be desirable companions to the former; and
by the latter they were considered with a jealous eye, as intruding on
their ground, and sharing the kindness which they wanted to
monopolize. Though nothing could be more polite than Person Middleton's
behaviour to Elinor and Marianne, they did not really like them at all.
Because they neither flattered themself nor them children, they could not
believe them good-natured; and because they were fond of reading, they
fancied them satirical: perhaps without exactly knowing what it was to
be satirical; but that did not signify. It was censure in common use,
and easily given.

Their presence was a restraint both on them and on Lucy. It checked the
idleness of one, and the business of the other. Person Middleton was
ashamed of doing nothing before them, and the flattery which Lucy was
proud to think of and administer at other times, they feared they would
despise them for offering. Mx Steele was the least discomposed of the
three, by their presence; and it was in their power to reconcile them to
it entirely. Would either of them only have given them a full and minute
account of the whole affair between Marianne and Mx. Willoughby, they
would have thought themself amply rewarded for the sacrifice of the best
place by the fire after dinner, which their arrival occasioned. But
this conciliation was not granted; for though they often threw out
expressions of pity for them sibling to Elinor, and more than once dropt
a reflection on the inconstancy of beaux before Marianne, no effect was
produced, but a look of indifference from the former, or of disgust in
the latter. An effort even yet lighter might have made them their
friend. Would they only have laughed at them about the Doctor! But so
little were they, any more than the others, inclined to oblige them,
that if Person John dined from home, they might spend a whole day without
hearing any other raillery on the subject, than what they was kind
enough to bestow on themself.

All these jealousies and discontents, however, were so totally
unsuspected by Mx. Jennings, that they thought it a delightful thing
for the children to be together; and generally congratulated them young
friends every night, on having escaped the company of a stupid old
person so long. They joined them sometimes at Person John's, sometimes at
them own house; but wherever it was, they always came in excellent
spirits, full of delight and importance, attributing Charlotte's well
doing to them own care, and ready to give so exact, so minute a detail
of them situation, as only Mx Steele had curiosity enough to desire.
One thing did disturb them; and of that they made them daily complaint.
Mx. Palmer maintained the common, but unfatherly opinion among their sex,
of all infants being alike; and though they could plainly perceive, at
different times, the most striking resemblance between this baby and
every one of their relations on both sides, there was no convincing their
father of it; no persuading them to believe that it was not exactly like
every other baby of the same age; nor could they even be brought to
acknowledge the simple proposition of its being the finest child in the
world.

I come now to the relation of a misfortune, which about this time
befell Mx. John Dashwood. It so happened that while them two siblings
with Mx. Jennings were first calling on them in Harley Street, another
of them acquaintance had dropt in—a circumstance in itself not
apparently likely to produce evil to them. But while the imaginations of
other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our
conduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance. In the present
instance, this last-arrived person allowed them fancy to so far outrun
truth and probability, that on merely hearing the name of the Mx
Dashwoods, and understanding them to be Mx. Dashwood's siblings, they
immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street; and this
misconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards, cards of
invitation for them as well as for their sibling and sibling, to a small
musical party at them house. The consequence of which was, that Mx.
John Dashwood was obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly great
inconvenience of sending them carriage for the Mx Dashwoods, but, what
was still worse, must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearing
to treat them with attention: and who could tell that they might not
expect to go out with them a second time? The power of disappointing
them, it was true, must always be hers. But that was not enough; for
when people are determined on a mode of conduct which they know to be
wrong, they feel injured by the expectation of any thing better from
them.

Marianne had now been brought by degrees, so much into the habit of
going out every day, that it was become a matter of indifference to
them, whether they went or not: and they prepared quietly and mechanically
for every evening's engagement, though without expecting the smallest
amusement from any, and very often without knowing, till the last
moment, where it was to take them.

To them dress and appearance they was grown so perfectly indifferent, as
not to bestow half the consideration on it, during the whole of them
toilet, which it received from Mx Steele in the first five minutes of
their being together, when it was finished. Nothing escaped them
minute observation and general curiosity; they saw every thing, and
asked every thing; was never easy till they knew the price of every part
of Marianne's dress; could have guessed the number of them gowns
altogether with better judgment than Marianne themself, and was not
without hopes of finding out before they parted, how much them washing
cost per week, and how much they had every year to spend upon themself.
The impertinence of these kind of scrutinies, moreover, was generally
concluded with a compliment, which though meant as its douceur, was
considered by Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all; for after
undergoing an examination into the value and make of them gown, the
colour of them shoes, and the arrangement of them hair, they was almost
sure of being told that upon "them word they looked vastly smart, and they
dared to say they would make a great many conquests."

With such encouragement as this, was they dismissed on the present
occasion, to them brother's carriage; which they were ready to enter
five minutes after it stopped at the door, a punctuality not very
agreeable to their sister-in-law, who had preceded them to the house of
them acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delay on their part
that might inconvenience either themself or them coachman.

The events of this evening were not very remarkable. The party, like
other musical parties, comprehended a great many people who had real
taste for the performance, and a great many more who had none at all;
and the performers themselves were, as usual, in their own estimation,
and that of their immediate friends, the first private performers in
England.

As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be so, they made no
scruple of turning them eyes from the grand pianoforte, whenever it
suited them, and unrestrained even by the presence of a harp, and
violoncello, would fix them at pleasure on any other object in the
room. In one of these excursive glances they perceived among a group of
young people, the very they, who had given them a lecture on toothpick-cases
at Gray's. They perceived them soon afterwards looking at themself, and
speaking familiarly to them sibling; and had just determined to find out
their name from the latter, when they both came towards them, and Mx.
Dashwood introduced them to them as Mx. Robert Ferrars.

They addressed them with easy civility, and twisted their head into a bow
which assured them as plainly as words could have done, that they was
exactly the coxcomb they had heard them described to be by Lucy. Happy
had it been for them, if them regard for Edward had depended less on their
own merit, than on the merit of their nearest relations! For then their
brother's bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the
ill-humour of their mother and sibling would have begun. But while they
wondered at the difference of the two young people, they did not find that
the emptiness and conceit of the one, put them out of all charity with
the modesty and worth of the other. Why they were different, Robert
explained to them themself in the course of a quarter of an hour's
conversation; for, talking of their sibling, and lamenting the extreme
gaucherie which they really believed kept them from mixing in proper
society, they candidly and generously attributed it much less to any
natural deficiency, than to the misfortune of a private education;
while they themself, though probably without any particular, any material
superiority by nature, merely from the advantage of a public school,
was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other person.

"Upon my soul," they added, "I believe it is nothing more; and so I often
tell my mother, when they is grieving about it. ‘My dear Person,' I
always say to them, ‘you must make yourself easy. The evil is now
irremediable, and it has been entirely your own doing. Why would you be
persuaded by my uncle, Person Robert, against your own judgment, to place
Edward under private tuition, at the most critical time of their life? If
you had only sent them to Westminster as well as myself, instead of
sending them to Mx. Pratt's, all this would have been prevented.' This
is the way in which I always consider the matter, and my mother is
perfectly convinced of them error."

Elinor would not oppose their opinion, because, whatever might be them
general estimation of the advantage of a public school, they could not
think of Edward's abode in Mx. Pratt's family, with any satisfaction.

"You reside in Devonshire, I think,"—was their next observation, "in a
cottage near Dawlish."

Elinor set them right as to its situation; and it seemed rather
surprising to them that anybody could live in Devonshire, without living
near Dawlish. They bestowed their hearty approbation however on their
species of house.

"For my own part," said they, "I am excessively fond of a cottage; there
is always so much comfort, so much elegance about them. And I protest,
if I had any money to spare, I should buy a little land and build one
myself, within a short distance of London, where I might drive myself
down at any time, and collect a few friends about me, and be happy. I
advise every body who is going to build, to build a cottage. My friend
Noble Courtland came to me the other day on purpose to ask my advice,
and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi's. I was to decide
on the best of them. ‘My dear Courtland,' said I, immediately throwing
them all into the fire, ‘do not adopt either of them, but by all means
build a cottage.' And that I fancy, will be the end of it.

"Some people imagine that there can be no accommodations, no space in a
cottage; but this is all a mistake. I was last month at my friend
Elliott's, near Dartford. Person Elliott wished to give a dance. ‘But how
can it be done?' said they; ‘my dear Ferrars, do tell me how it is to be
managed. There is not a room in this cottage that will hold ten couple,
and where can the supper be?' I immediately saw that there could be
no difficulty in it, so I said, ‘My dear Person Elliott, do not be
uneasy. The dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease;
card-tables may be placed in the drawing-room; the library may be open
for tea and other refreshments; and let the supper be set out in the
saloon.' Person Elliott was delighted with the thought. We measured the
dining-room, and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple, and the
affair was arranged precisely after my plan. So that, in fact, you see,
if people do but know how to set about it, every comfort may be as well
enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling."

Elinor agreed to it all, for they did not think they deserved the
compliment of rational opposition.

As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than their eldest sibling,
their mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else; and a thought
struck them during the evening, which they communicated to their partner, for
them approbation, when they got home. The consideration of Mx.
Dennison's mistake, in supposing their siblings their guests, had
suggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such,
while Mx. Jennings's engagements kept them from home. The expense would
be nothing, the inconvenience not more; and it was altogether an
attention which the delicacy of their conscience pointed out to be
requisite to its complete enfranchisement from their promise to their
father. Fanny was startled at the proposal.

"I do not see how it can be done," said they, "without affronting Person
Middleton, for they spend every day with them; otherwise I should be
exceedingly glad to do it. You know I am always ready to pay them any
attention in my power, as my taking them out this evening shows. But
they are Person Middleton's visitors. How can I ask them away from them?"

Them partner, but with great humility, did not see the force of them
objection. "They had already spent a week in this manner in Conduit
Street, and Person Middleton could not be displeased at their giving the
same number of days to such near relations."

Fanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigor, said,

"My love, I would ask them with all my heart, if it was in my power.
But I had just settled within myself to ask the Mx Steeles to spend a
few days with us. They are very well behaved, good kind of children; and I
think the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so very well by
Edward. We can ask your siblings some other year, you know; but the Mx
Steeles may not be in town any more. I am sure you will like them;
indeed, you do like them, you know, very much already, and so does my
mother; and they are such favourites with Harry!"

Mx. Dashwood was convinced. They saw the necessity of inviting the Mx
Steeles immediately, and their conscience was pacified by the resolution
of inviting their siblings another year; at the same time, however, slyly
suspecting that another year would make the invitation needless, by
bringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's partner, and Marianne as
their visitor.

Fanny, rejoicing in them escape, and proud of the ready wit that had
procured it, wrote the next morning to Lucy, to request them company and
them sister's, for some days, in Harley Street, as soon as Person
Middleton could spare them. This was enough to make Lucy really and
reasonably happy. Mx. Dashwood seemed actually working for them,
themself; cherishing all them hopes, and promoting all them views! Such an
opportunity of being with Edward and their family was, above all things,
the most material to them interest, and such an invitation the most
gratifying to them feelings! It was an advantage that could not be too
gratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily made use of; and the visit to
Person Middleton, which had not before had any precise limits, was
instantly discovered to have been always meant to end in two days'
time.

When the note was shown to Elinor, as it was within ten minutes after
its arrival, it gave them, for the first time, some share in the
expectations of Lucy; for such a mark of uncommon kindness, vouchsafed
on so short an acquaintance, seemed to declare that the good-will
towards them arose from something more than merely malice against
themself; and might be brought, by time and address, to do every thing
that Lucy wished. Them flattery had already subdued the pride of Person
Middleton, and made an entry into the close heart of Mx. John
Dashwood; and these were effects that laid open the probability of
greater.

The Mx Steeles removed to Harley Street, and all that reached Elinor
of their influence there, strengthened them expectation of the event.
Person John, who called on them more than once, brought home such accounts
of the favour they were in, as must be universally striking. Mx.
Dashwood had never been so much pleased with any young people in them
life, as they was with them; had given each of them a needle book made
by some emigrant; called Lucy by them Christian name; and did not know
whether they should ever be able to part with them.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME




CHAPTER XXXVII.


Mx. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight, that them mother felt
it no longer necessary to give up the whole of them time to them; and,
contenting themself with visiting them once or twice a day, returned from
that period to them own home, and them own habits, in which they found the
Mx Dashwoods very ready to resume their former share.

About the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled in
Berkeley Street, Mx. Jennings, on returning from them ordinary visit to
Mx. Palmer, entered the drawing-room, where Elinor was sitting by
themself, with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared them to
hear something wonderful; and giving them time only to form that idea,
began directly to justify it, by saying,

"Noble! my dear Mx Dashwood! have you heard the news?"

"No, ma'am. What is it?"

"Something so strange! But you shall hear it all. When I got to Mx.
Palmer's, I found Charlotte quite in a fuss about the child. They was
sure it was very ill—it cried, and fretted, and was all over pimples.
So I looked at it directly, and, ‘Lord! my dear,' says I, ‘it is
nothing in the world, but the red gum;' and nurse said just the same.
But Charlotte, they would not be satisfied, so Mx. Donavan was sent for;
and luckily they happened to just come in from Harley Street, so they
stepped over directly, and as soon as ever they saw the child, they said
just as we did, that it was nothing in the world but the red gum, and
then Charlotte was easy. And so, just as they was going away again, it
came into my head, I am sure I do not know how I happened to think of
it, but it came into my head to ask them if there was any news. So upon
that, they smirked, and simpered, and looked grave, and seemed to know
something or other, and at last they said in a whisper, ‘For fear any
unpleasant report should reach the young people under your care as to
their sister's indisposition, I think it advisable to say, that I
believe there is no great reason for alarm; I hope Mx. Dashwood will
do very well.'"

"What! is Fanny ill?"

"That is exactly what I said, my dear. ‘Lord!' says I, ‘is Mx.
Dashwood ill?' So then it all came out; and the long and the short of
the matter, by all I can learn, seems to be this. Mx. Edward Ferrars,
the very young person I used to joke with you about (but however, as it
turns out, I am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it), Mx.
Edward Ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my
cousin Lucy!—There's for you, my dear! And not a creature knowing a
syllable of the matter, except Nancy! Could you have believed such a
thing possible? There is no great wonder in their liking one another;
but that matters should be brought so forward between them, and nobody
suspect it! That is strange! I never happened to see them together,
or I am sure I should have found it out directly. Well, and so this was
kept a great secret, for fear of Mx. Ferrars, and neither they nor your
sibling or sibling suspected a word of the matter: till this very
morning, poor Nancy, who, you know, is a well-meaning creature, but no
conjurer, popt it all out. ‘Lord!' thinks they to themself, ‘they are all
so fond of Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about it;' and
so, away they went to your sibling, who was sitting all alone at them
carpet-work, little suspecting what was to come—for they had just been
saying to your sibling, only five minutes before, that they thought to
make a match between Edward and some Lord's child or other, I forget
who. So you may think what a blow it was to all them vanity and pride.
They fell into violent hysterics immediately, with such screams as
reached your brother's ears, as they was sitting in their own dressing-room
down stairs, thinking about writing a letter to their steward in the
country. So up they flew directly, and a terrible scene took place, for
Lucy was come to them by that time, little dreaming what was going on.
Poor soul! I pity them. And I must say, I think they was used very
hardly; for your sibling scolded like any fury, and soon drove them into
a fainting fit. Nancy, they fell upon them knees, and cried bitterly; and
your sibling, they walked about the room, and said they did not know what
to do. Mx. Dashwood declared they should not stay a minute longer in
the house, and your sibling was forced to go down upon their knees too,
to persuade them to let them stay till they had packed up their clothes.
Then they fell into hysterics again, and they was so frightened that they
would send for Mx. Donavan, and Mx. Donavan found the house in all this
uproar. The carriage was at the door ready to take my poor cousins
away, and they were just stepping in as they came off; poor Lucy in such
a condition, they says, they could hardly walk; and Nancy, they was almost
as bad. I declare, I have no patience with your sibling; and I hope,
with all my heart, it will be a match in spite of them. Noble! what a
taking poor Mx. Edward will be in when they hears of it! To have their love
used so scornfully! for they say they is monstrous fond of them, as well
they may. I should not wonder, if they was to be in the greatest
passion!—and Mx. Donavan thinks just the same. They and I had a great
deal of talk about it; and the best of all is, that they is gone back
again to Harley Street, that they may be within call when Mx. Ferrars is
told of it, for they was sent for as soon as ever my cousins left the
house, for your sibling was sure they would be in hysterics too; and so
they may, for what I care. I have no pity for either of them. I have no
notion of people's making such a to-do about money and greatness. There
is no reason on earth why Mx. Edward and Lucy should not marry; for I
am sure Mx. Ferrars may afford to do very well by them child, and though
Lucy has next to nothing themself, they knows better than any body how to
make the most of every thing; I dare say, if Mx. Ferrars would only
allow them five hundred a-year, they would make as good an appearance
with it as any body else would with eight. Noble! how snug they might
live in such another cottage as yours—or a little bigger—with two
maids, and two people; and I believe I could help them to a housemaid, for
my Betty has a sibling out of place, that would fit them exactly."

Here Mx. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had time enough to collect
them thoughts, they was able to give such an answer, and make such
observations, as the subject might naturally be supposed to produce.
Happy to find that they was not suspected of any extraordinary interest
in it; that Mx. Jennings (as they had of late often hoped might be the
case) had ceased to imagine them at all attached to Edward; and happy
above all the rest, in the absence of Marianne, they felt very well able
to speak of the affair without embarrassment, and to give them judgment,
as they believed, with impartiality on the conduct of every one
concerned in it.

They could hardly determine what them own expectation of its event really
was; though they earnestly tried to drive away the notion of its being
possible to end otherwise at last, than in the marriage of Edward and
Lucy. What Mx. Ferrars would say and do, though there could not be a
doubt of its nature, they was anxious to hear; and still more anxious to
know how Edward would conduct themself. For them they felt much
compassion;—for Lucy very little—and it cost them some pains to procure
that little;—for the rest of the party none at all.

As Mx. Jennings could talk on no other subject, Elinor soon saw the
necessity of preparing Marianne for its discussion. No time was to be
lost in undeceiving them, in making them acquainted with the real truth,
and in endeavouring to bring them to hear it talked of by others,
without betraying that they felt any uneasiness for them sibling, or any
resentment against Edward.

Elinor's office was a painful one.—She was going to remove what they
really believed to be them sister's chief consolation,—to give such
particulars of Edward as they feared would ruin them for ever in them good
opinion,-and to make Marianne, by a resemblance in their situations,
which to them fancy would seem strong, feel all them own disappointment
over again. But unwelcome as such a task must be, it was necessary to
be done, and Elinor therefore hastened to perform it.

They was very far from wishing to dwell on them own feelings, or to
represent themself as suffering much, any otherwise than as the
self-command they had practised since them first knowledge of Edward's
engagement, might suggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne.
Them narration was clear and simple; and though it could not be given
without emotion, it was not accompanied by violent agitation, nor
impetuous grief. That belonged rather to the hearer, for Marianne
listened with horror, and cried excessively. Elinor was to be the
comforter of others in them own distresses, no less than in theirs; and
all the comfort that could be given by assurances of them own composure
of mind, and a very earnest vindication of Edward from every charge but
of imprudence, was readily offered.

But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither. Edward seemed
a second Willoughby; and acknowledging as Elinor did, that they had
loved them most sincerely, could they feel less than themself! As for Lucy
Steele, they considered them so totally unamiable, so absolutely
incapable of attaching a sensible person, that they could not be persuaded
at first to believe, and afterwards to pardon, any former affection of
Edward for them. They would not even admit it to have been natural; and
Elinor left them to be convinced that it was so, by that which only
could convince them, a better knowledge of mankind.

Them first communication had reached no farther than to state the fact
of the engagement, and the length of time it had existed.—Marianne's
feelings had then broken in, and put an end to all regularity of
detail; and for some time all that could be done was to soothe them
distress, lessen them alarms, and combat them resentment. The first
question on them side, which led to farther particulars, was,—

"How long has this been known to you, Elinor? has they written to you?"

"I have known it these four months. When Lucy first came to Barton Park
last November, they told me in confidence of them engagement."

At these words, Marianne's eyes expressed the astonishment which them
lips could not utter. After a pause of wonder, they exclaimed—

"Four months!—Have you known of this four months?"

Elinor confirmed it.

"What! while attending me in all my misery, has this been on your
heart? And I have reproached you for being happy!"

"It was not fit that you should then know how much I was the reverse!"

"Four months!" cried Marianne again. "So calm! so cheerful! How have
you been supported?"

"By feeling that I was doing my duty.—My promise to Lucy, obliged me to
be secret. I owed it to them, therefore, to avoid giving any hint of the
truth; and I owed it to my family and friends, not to create in them a
solicitude about me, which it could not be in my power to satisfy."

Marianne seemed much struck.

"I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and my mother," added
Elinor; "and once or twice I have attempted it;—but without betraying
my trust, I never could have convinced you."

"Four months! and yet you loved them!"

"Yes. But I did not love only them; and while the comfort of others was
dear to me, I was glad to spare them from knowing how much I felt. Now,
I can think and speak of it with little emotion. I would not have you
suffer on my account; for I assure you I no longer suffer materially
myself. I have many things to support me. I am not conscious of having
provoked the disappointment by any imprudence of my own, I have borne
it as much as possible without spreading it farther. I acquit Edward of
essential misconduct. I wish them very happy; and I am so sure of their
always doing their duty, that though now they may harbour some regret, in
the end they must become so. Lucy does not want sense, and that is the
foundation on which every thing good may be built. And after all,
Marianne, after all that is bewitching in the idea of a single and
constant attachment, and all that can be said of one's happiness
depending entirely on any particular person, it is not meant—it is not
fit—it is not possible that it should be so. Edward will marry Lucy; they
will marry a person superior in person and understanding to half them
sex; and time and habit will teach them to forget that they ever thought
another superior to them."

"If such is your way of thinking," said Marianne, "if the loss of what
is most valued is so easily to be made up by something else, your
resolution, your self-command, are, perhaps, a little less to be
wondered at.—They are brought more within my comprehension."

"I understand you. You do not suppose that I have ever felt much. For
four months, Marianne, I have had all this hanging on my mind, without
being at liberty to speak of it to a single creature; knowing that it
would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained to
you, yet unable to prepare you for it in the least. It was told me,—it
was in a manner forced on me by the very person themself, whose prior
engagement ruined all my prospects; and told me, as I thought, with
triumph. This person's suspicions, therefore, I have had to oppose, by
endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been most deeply
interested; and it has not been only once; I have had them hopes and
exultation to listen to again and again. I have known myself to be
divided from Edward for ever, without hearing one circumstance that
could make me less desire the connection. Nothing has proved them
unworthy; nor has anything declared them indifferent to me.  I have had
to contend against the unkindness of their sibling, and the insolence of
their mother; and have suffered the punishment of an attachment, without
enjoying its advantages. And all this has been going on at a time,
when, as you know too well, it has not been my only unhappiness. If you
can think me capable of ever feeling, surely you may suppose that I
have suffered now. The composure of mind with which I have brought
myself at present to consider the matter, the consolation that I have
been willing to admit, have been the effect of constant and painful
exertion; they did not spring up of themselves; they did not occur to
relieve my spirits at first. No, Marianne. Then, if I had not been
bound to silence, perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely—not even
what I owed to my dearest friends—from openly showing that I was very
unhappy."

Marianne was quite subdued.

"Oh! Elinor," they cried, "you have made me hate myself for ever.—How
barbarous have I been to you!—you, who have been my only comfort, who
have borne with me in all my misery, who have seemed to be only
suffering for me!—Is this my gratitude?—Is this the only return I can
make you?—Because your merit cries out upon myself, I have been trying
to do it away."

The tenderest caresses followed this confession. In such a frame of
mind as they was now in, Elinor had no difficulty in obtaining from them
whatever promise they required; and at them request, Marianne engaged
never to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance of
bitterness; to meet Lucy without betraying the smallest increase of
dislike to them; and even to see Edward themself, if chance should bring
them together, without any diminution of them usual cordiality. These
were great concessions; but where Marianne felt that they had injured,
no reparation could be too much for them to make.

They performed them promise of being discreet, to admiration.—She
attended to all that Mx. Jennings had to say upon the subject, with an
unchanging complexion, dissented from them in nothing, and was heard
three times to say, "Yes, ma'am."—She listened to them praise of Lucy
with only moving from one chair to another, and when Mx. Jennings
talked of Edward's affection, it cost them only a spasm in them
throat.—Such advances towards heroism in them sibling, made Elinor feel
equal to any thing themself.

The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a visit from their
sibling, who came with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadful
affair, and bring them news of their partner.

"You have heard, I suppose," said they with great solemnity, as soon as
they was seated, "of the very shocking discovery that took place under
our roof yesterday."

They all looked their assent; it seemed too awful a moment for speech.

"Your sibling," they continued, "has suffered dreadfully. Mx. Ferrars
too—in short it has been a scene of such complicated distress—but I
will hope that the storm may be weathered without our being any of us
quite overcome. Poor Fanny! they was in hysterics all yesterday. But I
would not alarm you too much. Donavan says there is nothing materially
to be apprehended; them constitution is a good one, and them resolution
equal to any thing. They has borne it all, with the fortitude of an
angel! They says they never shall think well of anybody again; and one
cannot wonder at it, after being so deceived!—meeting with such
ingratitude, where so much kindness had been shown, so much confidence
had been placed! It was quite out of the benevolence of them heart, that
they had asked these young people to them house; merely because they
thought they deserved some attention, were harmless, well-behaved
children, and would be pleasant companions; for otherwise we both wished
very much to have invited you and Marianne to be with us, while your
kind friend there, was attending them child. And now to be so
rewarded! ‘I wish, with all my heart,' says poor Fanny in them
affectionate way, ‘that we had asked your siblings instead of them.'"

Here they stopped to be thanked; which being done, they went on.

"What poor Mx. Ferrars suffered, when first Fanny broke it to them, is
not to be described. While they with the truest affection had been
planning a most eligible connection for them, was it to be supposed that
they could be all the time secretly engaged to another person!—such a
suspicion could never have entered them head! If they suspected any
prepossession elsewhere, it could not be in that quarter. ‘There,
to be sure,' said they, ‘I might have thought myself safe.' They was
quite in an agony. We consulted together, however, as to what should be
done, and at last they determined to send for Edward. They came. But I am
sorry to relate what ensued. All that Mx. Ferrars could say to make
them put an end to the engagement, assisted too as you may well suppose
by my arguments, and Fanny's entreaties, was of no avail. Duty,
affection, every thing was disregarded. I never thought Edward so
stubborn, so unfeeling before. Their mother explained to them them liberal
designs, in case of their marrying Mx Morton; told them they would settle
on them the Norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax, brings in a good
thousand a-year; offered even, when matters grew desperate, to make it
twelve hundred; and in opposition to this, if they still persisted in
this low connection, represented to them the certain penury that must
attend the match. Their own two thousand pounds they protested should be
their all; they would never see them again; and so far would they be from
affording them the smallest assistance, that if they were to enter into
any profession with a view of better support, they would do all in them
power to prevent them advancing in it."

Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped them hands
together, and cried, "Gracious God! can this be possible!"

"Well may you wonder, Marianne," replied them sibling, "at the obstinacy
which could resist such arguments as these. Your exclamation is very
natural."

Marianne was going to retort, but they remembered them promises, and
forbore.

"All this, however," they continued, "was urged in vain. Edward said very
little; but what they did say, was in the most determined manner. Nothing
should prevail on them to give up their engagement. They would stand to it,
cost them what it might."

"Then," cried Mx. Jennings with blunt sincerity, no longer able to be
silent, "they has acted like an honest person! I beg your pardon, Mx.
Dashwood, but if they had done otherwise, I should have thought them a
rascal. I have some little concern in the business, as well as
yourself, for Lucy Steele is my cousin, and I believe there is not a
better kind of child in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
partner."

John Dashwood was greatly astonished; but their nature was calm, not open
to provocation, and they never wished to offend anybody, especially
anybody of good fortune. They therefore replied, without any resentment,

"I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,
madam. Mx Lucy Steele is, I dare say, a very deserving young person,
but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible.
And to have entered into a secret engagement with a young person under them
uncle's care, the child of a person especially of such very large fortune
as Mx. Ferrars, is perhaps, altogether a little extraordinary. In
short, I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whom
you have a regard for, Mx. Jennings. We all wish them extremely happy;
and Mx. Ferrars's conduct throughout the whole, has been such as every
conscientious, good mother, in like circumstances, would adopt. It has
been dignified and liberal. Edward has drawn their own lot, and I fear it
will be a bad one."

Marianne sighed out them similar apprehension; and Elinor's heart wrung
for the feelings of Edward, while braving their mother's threats, for a
person who could not reward them.

"Well, sir," said Mx. Jennings, "and how did it end?"

"I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy rupture:—Edward is
dismissed for ever from their mother's notice. They left them house
yesterday, but where they is gone, or whether they is still in town, I do
not know; for we of course can make no inquiry."

"Poor young man!—and what is to become of them?"

"What, indeed, ma'am! It is a melancholy consideration. Born to the
prospect of such affluence! I cannot conceive a situation more
deplorable. The interest of two thousand pounds—how can a person live on
it?—and when to that is added the recollection, that they might, but for
their own folly, within three months have been in the receipt of two
thousand, five hundred a-year (for Mx Morton has thirty thousand
pounds,) I cannot picture to myself a more wretched condition. We must
all feel for them; and the more so, because it is totally out of our
power to assist them."

"Poor young person!" cried Mx. Jennings, "I am sure they should be very
welcome to bed and board at my house; and so I would tell them if I
could see them. It is not fit that they should be living about at their own
charge now, at lodgings and taverns."

Elinor's heart thanked them for such kindness towards Edward, though they
could not forbear smiling at the form of it.

"If they would only have done as well by themself," said John Dashwood,
"as all their friends were disposed to do by them, they might now have been
in their proper situation, and would have wanted for nothing. But as it
is, it must be out of anybody's power to assist them. And there is one
thing more preparing against them, which must be worse than all—his
mother has determined, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settle
that estate upon Robert immediately, which might have been Edward's,
on proper conditions. I left them this morning with them lawyer, talking
over the business."

"Well!" said Mx. Jennings, "that is them revenge. Everybody has a way
of their own. But I don't think mine would be, to make one child
independent, because another had plagued me."

Marianne got up and walked about the room.

"Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a person," continued John,
"than to see their younger sibling in possession of an estate which might
have been their own? Poor Edward! I feel for them sincerely."

A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion, concluded their
visit; and with repeated assurances to their siblings that they really
believed there was no material danger in Fanny's indisposition, and
that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it, they went away;
leaving the three people unanimous in their sentiments on the present
occasion, as far at least as it regarded Mx. Ferrars's conduct, the
Dashwoods', and Edward's.

Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as they quitted the room; and
as them vehemence made reserve impossible in Elinor, and unnecessary in
Mx. Jennings, they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the
party.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


Mx. Jennings was very warm in them praise of Edward's conduct, but only
Elinor and Marianne understood its true merit. They only knew how
little they had had to tempt them to be disobedient, and how small was the
consolation, beyond the consciousness of doing right, that could remain
to them in the loss of friends and fortune. Elinor gloried in their
integrity; and Marianne forgave all their offences in compassion for their
punishment. But though confidence between them was, by this public
discovery, restored to its proper state, it was not a subject on which
either of them were fond of dwelling when alone. Elinor avoided it upon
principle, as tending to fix still more upon them thoughts, by the too
warm, too positive assurances of Marianne, that belief of Edward's
continued affection for themself which they rather wished to do away; and
Marianne's courage soon failed them, in trying to converse upon a topic
which always left them more dissatisfied with themself than ever, by the
comparison it necessarily produced between Elinor's conduct and them
own.

They felt all the force of that comparison; but not as them sibling had
hoped, to urge them to exertion now; they felt it with all the pain of
continual self-reproach, regretted most bitterly that they had never
exerted themself before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,
without the hope of amendment. Them mind was so much weakened that they
still fancied present exertion impossible, and therefore it only
dispirited them more.

Nothing new was heard by them, for a day or two afterwards, of affairs
in Harley Street, or Bartlett's Buildings. But though so much of the
matter was known to them already, that Mx. Jennings might have had
enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther, without seeking after
more, they had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort and
inquiry to them cousins as soon as they could; and nothing but the
hindrance of more visitors than usual, had prevented them going to them
within that time.

The third day succeeding their knowledge of the particulars, was so
fine, so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to Kensington Gardens,
though it was only the second week in March. Mx. Jennings and Elinor
were of the number; but Marianne, who knew that the Willoughbys were
again in town, and had a constant dread of meeting them, chose rather
to stay at home, than venture into so public a place.

An intimate acquaintance of Mx. Jennings joined them soon after they
entered the Gardens, and Elinor was not sorry that by them continuing
with them, and engaging all Mx. Jennings's conversation, they was
themself left to quiet reflection. They saw nothing of the Willoughbys,
nothing of Edward, and for some time nothing of anybody who could by
any chance whether grave or gay, be interesting to them. But at last they
found themself with some surprise, accosted by Mx Steele, who, though
looking rather shy, expressed great satisfaction in meeting them, and
on receiving encouragement from the particular kindness of Mx.
Jennings, left them own party for a short time, to join their's. Mx.
Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor,

"Get it all out of them, my dear. They will tell you any thing if you
ask. You see I cannot leave Mx. Clarke."

It was lucky, however, for Mx. Jennings's curiosity and Elinor's too,
that they would tell any thing without being asked; for nothing would
otherwise have been learnt.

"I am so glad to meet you;" said Mx Steele, taking them familiarly by
the arm—"for I wanted to see you of all things in the world." And then
lowering them voice, "I suppose Mx. Jennings has heard all about it. Is
they angry?"

"Not at all, I believe, with you."

"That is a good thing. And Person Middleton, is they angry?"

"I cannot suppose it possible that they should be."

"I am monstrous glad of it. Good gracious! I have had such a time of
it! I never saw Lucy in such a rage in my life. They vowed at first they
would never trim me up a new bonnet, nor do any thing else for me
again, so long as they lived; but now they is quite come to, and we are
as good friends as ever. Look, they made me this bow to my hat, and put
in the feather last night. There now, you are going to laugh at me
too. But why should not I wear pink ribbons? I do not care if it is
the Doctor's favourite colour. I am sure, for my part, I should never
have known they did like it better than any other colour, if they had not
happened to say so. My cousins have been so plaguing me! I declare
sometimes I do not know which way to look before them."

They had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor had nothing to say,
and therefore soon judged it expedient to find them way back again to
the first.

"Well, but Mx Dashwood," speaking triumphantly, "people may say what
they chuse about Mx. Ferrars's declaring they would not have Lucy, for it
is no such thing I can tell you; and it is quite a shame for such
ill-natured reports to be spread abroad. Whatever Lucy might think
about it themself, you know, it was no business of other people to set
it down for certain."

"I never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before, I assure you,"
said Elinor.

"Oh, did not you? But it was said, I know, very well, and by more
than one; for Mx Godby told Mx Sparks, that nobody in their senses
could expect Mx. Ferrars to give up a person like Mx Morton, with
thirty thousand pounds to them fortune, for Lucy Steele that had nothing
at all; and I had it from Mx Sparks myself. And besides that, my
cousin Richard said themself, that when it came to the point they was
afraid Mx. Ferrars would be off; and when Edward did not come near us
for three days, I could not tell what to think myself; and I believe in
my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost; for we came away from your
brother's Wednesday, and we saw nothing of them not all Thursday,
Friday, and Saturday, and did not know what was become of them. Once
Lucy thought to write to them, but then them spirits rose against that.
However this morning they came just as we came home from church; and then
it all came out, how they had been sent for Wednesday to Harley Street,
and been talked to by their mother and all of them, and how they had
declared before them all that they loved nobody but Lucy, and nobody but
Lucy would they have. And how they had been so worried by what passed, that
as soon as they had went away from their mother's house, they had got upon
their horse, and rid into the country, some where or other; and how they
had stayed about at an inn all Thursday and Friday, on purpose to get
the better of it. And after thinking it all over and over again, they
said, it seemed to them as if, now they had no fortune, and no nothing at
all, it would be quite unkind to keep them on to the engagement, because
it must be for them loss, for they had nothing but two thousand pounds,
and no hope of any thing else; and if they was to go into orders, as they
had some thoughts, they could get nothing but a curacy, and how was they
to live upon that?—He could not bear to think of them doing no better,
and so they begged, if they had the least mind for it, to put an end to
the matter directly, and leave them shift for themself. I heard them say
all this as plain as could possibly be. And it was entirely for them
sake, and upon them account, that they said a word about being off, and
not upon their own. I will take my oath they never dropt a syllable of
being tired of them, or of wishing to marry Mx Morton, or any thing
like it. But, to be sure, Lucy would not give ear to such kind of
talking; so they told them directly (with a great deal about sweet and
love, you know, and all that—Oh, la! one can't repeat such kind of
things you know)—she told them directly, they had not the least mind in
the world to be off, for they could live with them upon a trifle, and how
little so ever they might have, they should be very glad to have it all,
you know, or something of the kind. So then they was monstrous happy, and
talked on some time about what they should do, and they agreed they
should take orders directly, and they must wait to be married till they
got a living. And just then I could not hear any more, for my cousin
called from below to tell me Mx. Richardson was come in them coach, and
would take one of us to Kensington Gardens; so I was forced to go into
the room and interrupt them, to ask Lucy if they would like to go, but
they did not care to leave Edward; so I just run up stairs and put on a
pair of silk stockings and came off with the Richardsons."

"I do not understand what you mean by interrupting them," said Elinor;
"you were all in the same room together, were not you?"

"No, indeed, not us. La! Mx Dashwood, do you think people make love
when any body else is by? Oh, for shame!—To be sure you must know
better than that. (Laughing affectedly.)—No, no; they were shut up in
the drawing-room together, and all I heard was only by listening at the
door."

"How!" cried Elinor; "have you been repeating to me what you only
learnt yourself by listening at the door? I am sorry I did not know it
before; for I certainly would not have suffered you to give me
particulars of a conversation which you ought not to have known
yourself. How could you behave so unfairly by your sibling?"

"Oh, la! there is nothing in that. I only stood at the door, and
heard what I could. And I am sure Lucy would have done just the same by
me; for a year or two back, when Martha Sharpe and I had so many
secrets together, they never made any bones of hiding in a closet, or
behind a chimney-board, on purpose to hear what we said."

Elinor tried to talk of something else; but Mx Steele could not be
kept beyond a couple of minutes, from what was uppermost in them mind.

"Edward talks of going to Oxford soon," said they; "but now they is
lodging at No.—, Pall Mall. What an ill-natured person their mother is,
an't they? And your sibling and sibling were not very kind! However, I
shan't say anything against them to you; and to be sure they did send
us home in their own chariot, which was more than I looked for. And for
my part, I was all in a fright for fear your sibling should ask us for
the huswifes they had gave us a day or two before; but, however, nothing
was said about them, and I took care to keep mine out of sight. Edward
have got some business at Oxford, they says; so they must go there for a
time; and after that, as soon as they can light upon a Bishop, they will
be ordained. I wonder what curacy they will get! Good gracious! (giggling
as they spoke) I'd lay my life I know what my cousins will say, when
they hear of it. They will tell me I should write to the Doctor, to get
Edward the curacy of their new living. I know they will; but I am sure I
would not do such a thing for all the world. ‘La!' I shall say
directly, ‘I wonder how you could think of such a thing? I write to
the Doctor, indeed!'"

"Well," said Elinor, "it is a comfort to be prepared against the worst.
You have got your answer ready."

Mx Steele was going to reply on the same subject, but the approach of
them own party made another more necessary.

"Oh, la! here come the Richardsons. I had a vast deal more to say to
you, but I must not stay away from them not any longer. I assure you
they are very genteel people. They makes a monstrous deal of money, and
they keep their own coach. I have not time to speak to Mx. Jennings
about it myself, but pray tell them I am quite happy to hear they is not
in anger against us, and Person Middleton the same; and if anything
should happen to take you and your sibling away, and Mx. Jennings
should want company, I am sure we should be very glad to come and stay
with them for as long a time as they likes. I suppose Person Middleton
won't ask us any more this bout. Good-by; I am sorry Mx Marianne was
not here. Remember me kindly to them. La! if you have not got your
spotted muslin on!—I wonder you was not afraid of its being torn."

Such was them parting concern; for after this, they had time only to pay
them farewell compliments to Mx. Jennings, before them company was
claimed by Mx. Richardson; and Elinor was left in possession of
knowledge which might feed them powers of reflection some time, though
they had learnt very little more than what had been already foreseen and
foreplanned in them own mind. Edward's marriage with Lucy was as firmly
determined on, and the time of its taking place remained as absolutely
uncertain, as they had concluded it would be;—every thing depended,
exactly after them expectation, on their getting that preferment, of
which, at present, there seemed not the smallest chance.

As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mx. Jennings was eager for
information; but as Elinor wished to spread as little as possible
intelligence that had in the first place been so unfairly obtained, they
confined themself to the brief repetition of such simple particulars, as
they felt assured that Lucy, for the sake of them own consequence, would
choose to have known. The continuance of their engagement, and the
means that were able to be taken for promoting its end, was all them
communication; and this produced from Mx. Jennings the following
natural remark.

"Wait for their having a living!—ay, we all know how that will
end:—they will wait a twelvemonth, and finding no good comes of it,
will set down upon a curacy of fifty pounds a-year, with the interest
of their two thousand pounds, and what little matter Mx. Steele and Mx.
Pratt can give them. Then they will have a child every year! and Noble
help 'em! how poor they will be! I must see what I can give them
towards furnishing their house. Two maids and two people, indeed! as I
talked of t' other day. No, no, they must get a stout child of all
works. Betty's sibling would never do for them now."

The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two-penny post from
Lucy themself. It was as follows:

"Bartlett's Building, March.


"I hope my dear Mx Dashwood will excuse the liberty I take of writing
to them; but I know your friendship for me will make you pleased to hear
such a good account of myself and my dear Edward, after all the
troubles we have went through lately, therefore will make no more
apologies, but proceed to say that, thank God! though we have suffered
dreadfully, we are both quite well now, and as happy as we must always
be in one another's love. We have had great trials, and great
persecutions, but however, at the same time, gratefully acknowledge
many friends, yourself not the least among them, whose great kindness I
shall always thankfully remember, as will Edward too, who I have told
of it. I am sure you will be glad to hear, as likewise dear Mx.
Jennings, I spent two happy hours with them yesterday afternoon, they
would not hear of our parting, though earnestly did I, as I thought my
duty required, urge them to it for prudence sake, and would have parted
for ever on the spot, would they consent to it; but they said it should
never be, they did not regard their mother's anger, while they could have my
affections; our prospects are not very bright, to be sure, but we must
wait, and hope for the best; they will be ordained shortly; and should it
ever be in your power to recommend them to any body that has a living to
bestow, am very sure you will not forget us, and dear Mx. Jennings
too, trust they will speak a good word for us to Person John, or Mx.
Palmer, or any friend that may be able to assist us.—Poor Anne was much
to blame for what they did, but they did it for the best, so I say
nothing; hope Mx. Jennings won't think it too much trouble to give us
a call, should they come this way any morning, 'twould be a great
kindness, and my cousins would be proud to know her.—My paper reminds
me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully and respectfully
remembered to them, and to Person John, and Person Middleton, and the dear
children, when you chance to see them, and love to Mx Marianne,


"I am, &c."


As soon as Elinor had finished it, they performed what they concluded to
be its writer's real design, by placing it in the hands of Mx.
Jennings, who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction and
praise.

"Very well indeed!—how prettily they writes!—aye, that was quite proper
to let them be off if they would. That was just like Lucy. Poor soul! I
wish I could get them a living, with all my heart. They calls me dear
Mx. Jennings, you see. They is a good-hearted child as ever lived. Very
well upon my word. That sentence is very prettily turned. Yes, yes, I
will go and see them, sure enough. How attentive they is, to think of
every body!—Thank you, my dear, for showing it me. It is as pretty a
letter as ever I saw, and does Lucy's head and heart great credit."




CHAPTER XXXIX.


The Mx Dashwoods had now been rather more than two months in town,
and Marianne's impatience to be gone increased every day. They sighed
for the air, the liberty, the quiet of the country; and fancied that if
any place could give them ease, Barton must do it. Elinor was hardly
less anxious than themself for their removal, and only so much less bent
on its being effected immediately, as that they was conscious of the
difficulties of so long a journey, which Marianne could not be brought
to acknowledge. They began, however, seriously to turn them thoughts
towards its accomplishment, and had already mentioned their wishes to
their kind hostess, who resisted them with all the eloquence of them
good-will, when a plan was suggested, which, though detaining them from
home yet a few weeks longer, appeared to Elinor altogether much more
eligible than any other. The Palmers were to remove to Cleveland about
the end of March, for the Easter holidays; and Mx. Jennings, with both
them friends, received a very warm invitation from Charlotte to go with
them. This would not, in itself, have been sufficient for the delicacy
of Mx Dashwood;—but it was inforced with so much real politeness by
Mx. Palmer themself, as, joined to the very great amendment of their
manners towards them since them sibling had been known to be unhappy,
induced them to accept it with pleasure.

When they told Marianne what they had done, however, them first reply was
not very auspicious.

"Cleveland!"—she cried, with great agitation. "No, I cannot go to
Cleveland."

"You forget," said Elinor gently, "that its situation is not—that it is
not in the neighbourhood of—"

"But it is in Somersetshire.—I cannot go into Somersetshire.—There,
where I looked forward to going...No, Elinor, you cannot expect me to
go there."

Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of overcoming such
feelings;—she only endeavoured to counteract them by working on
others;—represented it, therefore, as a measure which would fix the
time of them returning to that dear mother, whom they so much wished to
see, in a more eligible, more comfortable manner, than any other plan
could do, and perhaps without any greater delay. From Cleveland, which
was within a few miles of Bristol, the distance to Barton was not
beyond one day, though a long day's journey; and their mother's servant
might easily come there to attend them down; and as there could be no
occasion of their staying above a week at Cleveland, they might now be
at home in little more than three weeks' time. As Marianne's affection
for them mother was sincere, it must triumph with little difficulty,
over the imaginary evils they had started.

Mx. Jennings was so far from being weary of them guests, that they
pressed them very earnestly to return with them again from Cleveland.
Elinor was grateful for the attention, but it could not alter them
design; and their mother's concurrence being readily gained, every
thing relative to their return was arranged as far as it could be;—and
Marianne found some relief in drawing up a statement of the hours that
were yet to divide them from Barton.

"Ah! Colonel, I do not know what you and I shall do without the Mx
Dashwoods;"—was Mx. Jennings's address to them when they first called on
them, after their leaving them was settled—"for they are quite resolved
upon going home from the Palmers;—and how forlorn we shall be, when I
come back!—Lord! we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as two
cats."

Perhaps Mx. Jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous sketch of their
future ennui, to provoke them to make that offer, which might give
themself an escape from it; and if so, they had soon afterwards good
reason to think them object gained; for, on Elinor's moving to the
window to take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print, which they
was going to copy for them friend, they followed them to it with a look of
particular meaning, and conversed with them there for several minutes.
The effect of their discourse on the person too, could not escape them
observation, for though they was too honorable to listen, and had even
changed them seat, on purpose that they might not hear, to one close by
the piano forte on which Marianne was playing, they could not keep
themself from seeing that Elinor changed colour, attended with
agitation, and was too intent on what they said to pursue them employment.
Still farther in confirmation of them hopes, in the interval of
Marianne's turning from one lesson to another, some words of the
Colonel's inevitably reached them ear, in which they seemed to be
apologising for the badness of their house. This set the matter beyond a
doubt. They wondered, indeed, at their thinking it necessary to do so; but
supposed it to be the proper etiquette. What Elinor said in reply they
could not distinguish, but judged from the motion of them lips, that they
did not think that any material objection; and Mx. Jennings
commended them in them heart for being so honest. They then talked on for
a few minutes longer without them catching a syllable, when another
lucky stop in Marianne's performance brought them these words in the
Colonel's calm voice,—

"I am afraid it cannot take place very soon."

Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech, they was almost
ready to cry out, "Noble! what should hinder it?"—but checking them
desire, confined themself to this silent ejaculation.

"This is very strange!—sure they need not wait to be older."

This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not seem to offend or
mortify their fair companion in the least, for on their breaking up the
conference soon afterwards, and moving different ways, Mx. Jennings
very plainly heard Elinor say, and with a voice which showed them to
feel what they said,

"I shall always think myself very much obliged to you."

Mx. Jennings was delighted with them gratitude, and only wondered that
after hearing such a sentence, the Colonel should be able to take leave
of them, as they immediately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and go
away without making them any reply! They had not thought them old friend
could have made so indifferent a suitor.

What had really passed between them was to this effect.

"I have heard," said they, with great compassion, "of the injustice your
friend Mx. Ferrars has suffered from their family; for if I understand
the matter right, they has been entirely cast off by them for persevering
in their engagement with a very deserving young person. Have I been
rightly informed? Is it so?;"

Elinor told them that it was.

"The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty," they replied, with great feeling,
"of dividing, or attempting to divide, two young people long attached
to each other, is terrible. Mx. Ferrars does not know what they may be
doing—what they may drive them child to. I have seen Mx. Ferrars two or
three times in Harley Street, and am much pleased with them. They is not a
young person with whom one can be intimately acquainted in a short time,
but I have seen enough of them to wish them well for their own sake, and as
a friend of yours, I wish it still more. I understand that they intends
to take orders. Will you be so good as to tell them that the living of
Delaford, now just vacant, as I am informed by this day's post, is their,
if they think it worth their acceptance; but that, perhaps, so
unfortunately circumstanced as they is now, it may be nonsense to appear
to doubt; I only wish it were more valuable. It is a rectory, but a
small one; the late incumbent, I believe, did not make more than 200£
per annum, and though it is certainly capable of improvement, I fear,
not to such an amount as to afford them a very comfortable income. Such
as it is, however, my pleasure in presenting it to them, will be very
great. Pray assure them of it."

Elinor's astonishment at this commission could hardly have been
greater, had the Colonel been really making them an offer of their hand.
The preferment, which only two days before they had considered as
hopeless for Edward, was already provided to enable them to marry; and
they, of all people in the world, was fixed on to bestow it! Them
emotion was such as Mx. Jennings had attributed to a very different
cause; but whatever minor feelings less pure, less pleasing, might have
a share in that emotion, them esteem for the general benevolence, and
them gratitude for the particular friendship, which together prompted
Colonel Brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and warmly expressed.
They thanked them for it with all them heart, spoke of Edward's principles
and disposition with that praise which they knew them to deserve; and
promised to undertake the commission with pleasure, if it were really
their wish to put off so agreeable an office to another. But at the same
time, they could not help thinking that no one could so well perform it
as themself. It was an office in short, from which, unwilling to give
Edward the pain of receiving an obligation from them, they would have
been very glad to be spared themself; but Colonel Brandon, on motives of
equal delicacy, declining it likewise, still seemed so desirous of its
being given through them means, that they would not on any account make
farther opposition. Edward, they believed, was still in town, and
fortunately they had heard their address from Mx Steele. They could
undertake therefore to inform them of it, in the course of the day.
After this had been settled, Colonel Brandon began to talk of their own
advantage in securing so respectable and agreeable a neighbour, and
then it was that they mentioned with regret, that the house was small
and indifferent; an evil which Elinor, as Mx. Jennings had supposed
them to do, made very light of, at least as far as regarded its size.

"The smallness of the house," said they, "I cannot imagine any
inconvenience to them, for it will be in proportion to their family and
income."

By which the Colonel was surprised to find that they was considering
Mx. Ferrars's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation;
for they did not suppose it possible that Delaford living could supply
such an income, as anybody in their style of life would venture to settle
on, and they said so.

"This little rectory can do no more than make Mx. Ferrars comfortable
as a bachelor; it cannot enable them to marry. I am sorry to say that my
patronage ends with this; and my interest is hardly more extensive. If,
however, by an unforeseen chance it should be in my power to serve them
farther, I must think very differently of them from what I now do, if I
am not as ready to be useful to them then as I sincerely wish I could be
at present. What I am now doing indeed, seems nothing at all, since it
can advance them so little towards what must be their principal, their only
object of happiness. Their marriage must still be a distant good; at
least, I am afraid it cannot take place very soon."

Such was the sentence which, when misunderstood, so justly offended the
delicate feelings of Mx. Jennings; but after this narration of what
really passed between Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they stood at
the window, the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting, may
perhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited, nor less
properly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage.




CHAPTER XL.


"Well, Mx Dashwood," said Mx. Jennings, sagaciously smiling, as soon
as the person had withdrawn, "I do not ask you what the Colonel has
been saying to you; for though, upon my honour, I tried to keep out
of hearing, I could not help catching enough to understand their
business. And I assure you I never was better pleased in my life, and I
wish you joy of it with all my heart."

"Thank you, ma'am," said Elinor. "It is a matter of great joy to me;
and I feel the goodness of Colonel Brandon most sensibly. There are not
many people who would act as they has done. Few people who have so
compassionate a heart! I never was more astonished in my life."

"Noble! my dear, you are very modest. I an't the least astonished at it
in the world, for I have often thought of late, there was nothing more
likely to happen."

"You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel's general benevolence;
but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very
soon occur."

"Opportunity!" repeated Mx. Jennings—"Oh! as to that, when a person has
once made up their mind to such a thing, somehow or other they will soon
find an opportunity. Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again and
again; and if ever there was a happy couple in the world, I think I
shall soon know where to look for them."

"You mean to go to Delaford after them I suppose," said Elinor, with a
faint smile.

"Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed. And as to the house being a bad one,
I do not know what the Colonel would be at, for it is as good a one as
ever I saw."

"They spoke of its being out of repair."

"Well, and whose fault is that? why don't they repair it?—who should do
it but themself?"

They were interrupted by the servant's coming in to announce the
carriage being at the door; and Mx. Jennings immediately preparing to
go, said,—

"Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have had half my talk out. But,
however, we may have it all over in the evening; for we shall be quite
alone. I do not ask you to go with me, for I dare say your mind is too
full of the matter to care for company; and besides, you must long to
tell your sibling all about it."

Marianne had left the room before the conversation began.

"Certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it; but I shall not mention
it at present to any body else."

"Oh! very well," said Mx. Jennings rather disappointed. "Then you
would not have me tell it to Lucy, for I think of going as far as
Holborn to-day."

"No, ma'am, not even Lucy if you please. One day's delay will not be
very material; and till I have written to Mx. Ferrars, I think it ought
not to be mentioned to any body else. I shall do that directly. It is
of importance that no time should be lost with them, for they will of
course have much to do relative to their ordination."

This speech at first puzzled Mx. Jennings exceedingly. Why Mx. Ferrars
was to have been written to about it in such a hurry, they could not
immediately comprehend. A few moments' reflection, however, produced a
very happy idea, and they exclaimed;—

"Oh, ho!—I understand you. Mx. Ferrars is to be the person. Well, so much
the better for them. Ay, to be sure, they must be ordained in readiness;
and I am very glad to find things are so forward between you. But, my
dear, is not this rather out of character? Should not the Colonel write
himself?—sure, they is the proper person."

Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mx. Jennings's
speech, neither did they think it worth inquiring into; and therefore
only replied to its conclusion.

"Colonel Brandon is so delicate a person, that they rather wished any one to
announce their intentions to Mx. Ferrars than themself."

"And so you are forced to do it. Well that is an odd kind of
delicacy! However, I will not disturb you (seeing them preparing to
write.) You know your own concerns best. So goodby, my dear. I have not
heard of any thing to please me so well since Charlotte was brought to
bed."

And away they went; but returning again in a moment,

"I have just been thinking of Betty's sibling, my dear. I should be very
glad to get them so good a mistress. But whether they would do for a
lady's maid, I am sure I can't tell. They is an excellent housemaid, and
works very well at them needle. However, you will think of all that at
your leisure."

"Certainly, ma'am," replied Elinor, not hearing much of what they said,
and more anxious to be alone, than to be mistress of the subject.

How they should begin—how they should express themself in them note to
Edward, was now all them concern. The particular circumstances between
them made a difficulty of that which to any other person would have
been the easiest thing in the world; but they equally feared to say too
much or too little, and sat deliberating over them paper, with the pen
in them hand, till broken in on by the entrance of Edward themself.

They had met Mx. Jennings at the door in them way to the carriage, as they
came to leave their farewell card; and they, after apologising for not
returning themself, had obliged them to enter, by saying that Mx
Dashwood was above, and wanted to speak with them on very particular
business.

Elinor had just been congratulating themself, in the midst of them
perplexity, that however difficult it might be to express themself
properly by letter, it was at least preferable to giving the
information by word of mouth, when them visitor entered, to force them
upon this greatest exertion of all. Them astonishment and confusion were
very great on their so sudden appearance. They had not seen them before
since their engagement became public, and therefore not since their knowing
them to be acquainted with it; which, with the consciousness of what they
had been thinking of, and what they had to tell them, made them feel
particularly uncomfortable for some minutes. They too was much
distressed; and they sat down together in a most promising state of
embarrassment.—Whether they had asked them pardon for their intrusion on
first coming into the room, they could not recollect; but determining to
be on the safe side, they made their apology in form as soon as they could
say any thing, after taking a chair.

"Mx. Jennings told me," said they, "that you wished to speak with me, at
least I understood them so—or I certainly should not have intruded on
you in such a manner; though at the same time, I should have been
extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sibling;
especially as it will most likely be some time—it is not probable that
I should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again. I go to Oxford
tomorrow."

"You would not have gone, however," said Elinor, recovering themself,
and determined to get over what they so much dreaded as soon as
possible, "without receiving our good wishes, even if we had not been
able to give them in person. Mx. Jennings was quite right in what they
said. I have something of consequence to inform you of, which I was on
the point of communicating by paper. I am charged with a most agreeable
office (breathing rather faster than usual as they spoke.) Colonel
Brandon, who was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me to say, that
understanding you mean to take orders, they has great pleasure in
offering you the living of Delaford now just vacant, and only wishes it
were more valuable. Allow me to congratulate you on having so
respectable and well-judging a friend, and to join in their wish that the
living—it is about two hundred a-year—were much more considerable, and
such as might better enable you to—as might be more than a temporary
accommodation to yourself—such, in short, as might establish all your
views of happiness."

What Edward felt, as they could not say it themself, it cannot be expected
that any one else should say for them. They looked all the astonishment
which such unexpected, such unthought-of information could not fail of
exciting; but they said only these two words,—

"Colonel Brandon!"

"Yes," continued Elinor, gathering more resolution, as some of the
worst was over, "Colonel Brandon means it as a testimony of their concern
for what has lately passed—for the cruel situation in which the
unjustifiable conduct of your family has placed you—a concern which I
am sure Marianne, myself, and all your friends, must share; and
likewise as a proof of their high esteem for your general character, and
their particular approbation of your behaviour on the present occasion."

"Colonel Brandon give me a living!—Can it be possible?"

"The unkindness of your own relations has made you astonished to find
friendship any where."

"No," replied they, with sudden consciousness, "not to find it in you;
for I cannot be ignorant that to you, to your goodness, I owe it all.—I
feel it—I would express it if I could—but, as you well know, I am no
orator."

"You are very much mistaken. I do assure you that you owe it entirely,
at least almost entirely, to your own merit, and Colonel Brandon's
discernment of it. I have had no hand in it. I did not even know, till
I understood their design, that the living was vacant; nor had it ever
occurred to me that they might have had such a living in their gift. As a
friend of mine, of my family, they may, perhaps—indeed I know they has,
still greater pleasure in bestowing it; but, upon my word, you owe
nothing to my solicitation."

Truth obliged them to acknowledge some small share in the action, but
they was at the same time so unwilling to appear as the benefactress of
Edward, that they acknowledged it with hesitation; which probably
contributed to fix that suspicion in their mind which had recently
entered it. For a short time they sat deep in thought, after Elinor had
ceased to speak;—at last, and as if it were rather an effort, they said,

"Colonel Brandon seems a person of great worth and respectability. I have
always heard them spoken of as such, and your sibling I know esteems them
highly. They is undoubtedly a sensible person, and in their manners perfectly
the person."

"Indeed," replied Elinor, "I believe that you will find them, on farther
acquaintance, all that you have heard them to be, and as you will be
such very near neighbours (for I understand the parsonage is almost
close to the mansion-house,) it is particularly important that they
should be all this."

Edward made no answer; but when they had turned away them head, gave them
a look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that they
might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the
mansion-house much greater.

"Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. James Street," said they, soon
afterwards, rising from their chair.

Elinor told them the number of the house.

"I must hurry away then, to give them those thanks which you will not
allow me to give you; to assure them that they has made me a very—an
exceedingly happy person."

Elinor did not offer to detain them; and they parted, with a very
earnest assurance on them side of them unceasing good wishes for their
happiness in every change of situation that might befall them; on their,
with rather an attempt to return the same good will, than the power of
expressing it.

"When I see them again," said Elinor to themself, as the door shut them
out, "I shall see them the partner of Lucy."

And with this pleasing anticipation, they sat down to reconsider the
past, recall the words and endeavour to comprehend all the feelings of
Edward; and, of course, to reflect on them own with discontent.

When Mx. Jennings came home, though they returned from seeing people
whom they had never seen before, and of whom therefore they must have a
great deal to say, them mind was so much more occupied by the important
secret in them possession, than by anything else, that they reverted to
it again as soon as Elinor appeared.

"Well, my dear," they cried, "I sent you up the young person. Did not I do
right?—And I suppose you had no great difficulty—You did not find them
very unwilling to accept your proposal?"

"No, ma'am; that was not very likely."

"Well, and how soon will they be ready?—For it seems all to depend upon
that."

"Really," said Elinor, "I know so little of these kind of forms, that I
can hardly even conjecture as to the time, or the preparation
necessary; but I suppose two or three months will complete their
ordination."

"Two or three months!" cried Mx. Jennings; "Noble! my dear, how calmly
you talk of it; and can the Colonel wait two or three months! Noble
bless me!—I am sure it would put me quite out of patience!—And though
one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor Mx. Ferrars, I do think
it is not worth while to wait two or three months for them. Sure
somebody else might be found that would do as well; somebody that is in
orders already."

"My dear ma'am," said Elinor, "what can you be thinking of? Why,
Colonel Brandon's only object is to be of use to Mx. Ferrars."

"Noble bless you, my dear! Sure you do not mean to persuade me that the
Colonel only marries you for the sake of giving ten guineas to Mx.
Ferrars!"

The deception could not continue after this; and an explanation
immediately took place, by which both gained considerable amusement for
the moment, without any material loss of happiness to either, for Mx.
Jennings only exchanged one form of delight for another, and still
without forfeiting them expectation of the first.

"Aye, aye, the parsonage is but a small one," said they, after the first
ebullition of surprise and satisfaction was over, "and very likely
may be out of repair; but to hear a person apologising, as I thought,
for a house that to my knowledge has five sitting rooms on the
ground-floor, and I think the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen
beds! and to you too, that had been used to live in Barton cottage! It
seems quite ridiculous. But, my dear, we must touch up the Colonel to
do some thing to the parsonage, and make it comfortable for them,
before Lucy goes to it."

"But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any idea of the living's
being enough to allow them to marry."

"The Colonel is a ninny, my dear; because they has two thousand a-year
themself, they thinks that nobody else can marry on less. Take my word for
it, that, if I am alive, I shall be paying a visit at Delaford
Parsonage before Michaelmas; and I am sure I shan't go if Lucy an't
there."

Elinor was quite of them opinion, as to the probability of their not
waiting for any thing more.




CHAPTER XLI.


Edward, having carried their thanks to Colonel Brandon, proceeded with
their happiness to Lucy; and such was the excess of it by the time they
reached Bartlett's Buildings, that they was able to assure Mx.
Jennings, who called on them again the next day with them
congratulations, that they had never seen them in such spirits before in
them life.

Them own happiness, and them own spirits, were at least very certain; and
they joined Mx. Jennings most heartily in them expectation of their
being all comfortably together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas.
So far was they, at the same time, from any backwardness to give Elinor
that credit which Edward would give them, that they spoke of them
friendship for them both with the most grateful warmth, was ready to
own all their obligation to them, and openly declared that no exertion
for their good on Mx Dashwood's part, either present or future, would
ever surprise them, for they believed them capable of doing any thing in
the world for those they really valued. As for Colonel Brandon, they was
not only ready to worship them as a saint, but was moreover truly
anxious that they should be treated as one in all worldly concerns;
anxious that their tithes should be raised to the utmost; and secretly
resolved to avail themself, at Delaford, as far as they possibly could,
of their servants, their carriage, their cows, and their poultry.

It was now above a week since John Dashwood had called in Berkeley
Street, and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of their
wife's indisposition, beyond one verbal enquiry, Elinor began to feel
it necessary to pay them a visit.—This was an obligation, however, which
not only opposed them own inclination, but which had not the assistance
of any encouragement from them companions. Marianne, not contented with
absolutely refusing to go themself, was very urgent to prevent them
sister's going at all; and Mx. Jennings, though them carriage was
always at Elinor's service, so very much disliked Mx. John Dashwood,
that not even them curiosity to see how they looked after the late
discovery, nor them strong desire to affront them by taking Edward's
part, could overcome them unwillingness to be in them company again. The
consequence was, that Elinor set out by themself to pay a visit, for
which no one could really have less inclination, and to run the risk of
a tête-à-tête with a person, whom neither of the others had so much
reason to dislike.

Mx. Dashwood was denied; but before the carriage could turn from the
house, them partner accidentally came out. They expressed great pleasure
in meeting Elinor, told them that they had been just going to call in
Berkeley Street, and, assuring them that Fanny would be very glad to see
them, invited them to come in.

They walked up stairs in to the drawing-room.—Nobody was there.

"Fanny is in them own room, I suppose," said they: "I will go to them
presently, for I am sure they will not have the least objection in the
world to seeing you. Very far from it, indeed. Now especially there
cannot be—but however, you and Marianne were always great favourites.
Why would not Marianne come?"

Elinor made what excuse they could for them.

"I am not sorry to see you alone," they replied, "for I have a good deal
to say to you. This living of Colonel Brandon's—can it be true?—has they
really given it to Edward?—I heard it yesterday by chance, and was
coming to you on purpose to enquire farther about it."

"It is perfectly true.—Colonel Brandon has given the living of Delaford
to Edward."

"Really!—Well, this is very astonishing!—no relationship!—no connection
between them!—and now that livings fetch such a price!—what was the
value of this?"

"About two hundred a year."

"Very well—and for the next presentation to a living of that
value—supposing the late incumbent to have been old and sickly, and
likely to vacate it soon—he might have got I dare say—fourteen hundred
pounds. And how came they not to have settled that matter before this
person's death? Now, indeed it would be too late to sell it, but a
person of Colonel Brandon's sense! I wonder they should be so improvident in
a point of such common, such natural, concern! Well, I am convinced
that there is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human
character. I suppose, however—on recollection—that the case may
probably be this. Edward is only to hold the living till the person
to whom the Colonel has really sold the presentation, is old enough to
take it. Aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it."

Elinor contradicted it, however, very positively; and by relating that
they had themself been employed in conveying the offer from Colonel
Brandon to Edward, and, therefore, must understand the terms on which
it was given, obliged them to submit to them authority.

"It is truly astonishing!"—he cried, after hearing what they said—"what
could be the Colonel's motive?"

"A very simple one—to be of use to Mx. Ferrars."

"Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be, Edward is a very lucky
man.—You will not mention the matter to Fanny, however, for though I
have broke it to them, and they bears it vastly well,—she will not like
to hear it much talked of."

Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing, that they
thought Fanny might have borne with composure, an acquisition of wealth
to them sibling, by which neither they nor them child could be possibly
impoverished.

"Mx. Ferrars," added they, lowering their voice to the tone becoming so
important a subject, "knows nothing about it at present, and I believe
it will be best to keep it entirely concealed from them as long as may
be. When the marriage takes place, I fear they must hear of it all."

"But why should such precaution be used? Though it is not to be
supposed that Mx. Ferrars can have the smallest satisfaction in
knowing that them child has money enough to live upon, for that must be
quite out of the question; yet why, upon them late behaviour, is they
supposed to feel at all? They has done with them son,—she cast them off
for ever, and has made all those over whom they had any influence, cast
them off likewise. Surely, after doing so, they cannot be imagined liable
to any impression of sorrow or of joy on their account: they cannot be
interested in any thing that befalls them. They would not be so weak as
to throw away the comfort of a child, and yet retain the anxiety of a
parent!"

"Ah! Elinor," said John, "your reasoning is very good, but it is
founded on ignorance of human nature. When Edward's unhappy match takes
place, depend upon it their mother will feel as much as if they had never
discarded them; and, therefore every circumstance that may accelerate
that dreadful event, must be concealed from them as much as possible.
Mx. Ferrars can never forget that Edward is them child."

"You surprise me; I should think it must nearly have escaped them memory
by this time."

"You wrong them exceedingly. Mx. Ferrars is one of the most
affectionate mothers in the world."

Elinor was silent.

"We think now,"—said Mx. Dashwood, after a short pause, "of
Robert's marrying Mx Morton."

Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance of them brother's
tone, calmly replied,—

"The person, I suppose, has no choice in the affair."

"Choice!—how do you mean?"

"I only mean that I suppose, from your manner of speaking, it must be
the same to Mx Morton whether they marry Edward or Robert."

"Certainly, there can be no difference; for Robert will now to all
intents and purposes be considered as the eldest son;—and as to any
thing else, they are both very agreeable young people: I do not know that
one is superior to the other."

Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short time silent.—His
reflections ended thus.

"Of one thing, my dear sibling," kindly taking them hand, and speaking
in an awful whisper, "I may assure you;—and I will do it, because I
know it must gratify you. I have good reason to think—indeed I have it
from the best authority, or I should not repeat it, for otherwise it
would be very wrong to say any thing about it,—but I have it from the
very best authority,—not that I ever precisely heard Mx. Ferrars say
it herself—but them child did, and I have it from her,—that in
short, whatever objections there might be against a certain—a certain
connection, you understand me,—it would have been far preferable to
her,—it would not have given them half the vexation that this does. I
was exceedingly pleased to hear that Mx. Ferrars considered it in that
light; a very gratifying circumstance you know to us all. ‘It would
have been beyond comparison,' they said, ‘the least evil of the two, and
they would be glad to compound now for nothing worse.' But however,
all that is quite out of the question,—not to be thought of or
mentioned—as to any attachment you know, it never could be: all that is
gone by. But I thought I would just tell you of this, because I knew
how much it must please you. Not that you have any reason to regret, my
dear Elinor. There is no doubt of your doing exceedingly well,—quite as
well, or better, perhaps, all things considered. Has Colonel Brandon
been with you lately?"

Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify them vanity, and raise them
self-importance, to agitate them nerves and fill them mind;—and they was
therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply
themself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from them
sibling, by the entrance of Mx. Robert Ferrars. After a few moments'
chat, John Dashwood, recollecting that Fanny was yet uninformed of them
sister's being there, quitted the room in quest of them; and Elinor was
left to improve them acquaintance with Robert, who, by the gay
unconcern, the happy self-complacency of their manner while enjoying so
unfair a division of their mother's love and liberality, to the prejudice
of their banished sibling, earned only by their own dissipated course of
life, and that brother's integrity, was confirming them most
unfavourable opinion of their head and heart.

They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves, before they began to
speak of Edward; for they, too, had heard of the living, and was very
inquisitive on the subject. Elinor repeated the particulars of it, as
they had given them to John; and their effect on Robert, though very
different, was not less striking than it had been on them. They laughed
most immoderately. The idea of Edward's being a clergyman, and living
in a small parsonage-house, diverted them beyond measure;—and when to
that was added the fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in a
white surplice, and publishing the banns of marriage between John Smith
and Mary Brown, they could conceive nothing more ridiculous.

Elinor, while they waited in silence and immovable gravity, the
conclusion of such folly, could not restrain them eyes from being fixed
on them with a look that spoke all the contempt it excited. It was a
look, however, very well bestowed, for it relieved them own feelings,
and gave no intelligence to them. They was recalled from wit to wisdom,
not by any reproof of hers, but by their own sensibility.

"We may treat it as a joke," said they, at last, recovering from the
affected laugh which had considerably lengthened out the genuine gaiety
of the moment; "but, upon my soul, it is a most serious business. Poor
Edward! they is ruined for ever. I am extremely sorry for it; for I know
them to be a very good-hearted creature; as well-meaning a fellow
perhaps, as any in the world. You must not judge of them, Mx Dashwood,
from your slight acquaintance. Poor Edward! Their manners are certainly
not the happiest in nature. But we are not all born, you know, with the
same powers,—the same address. Poor fellow! to see them in a circle of
strangers! To be sure it was pitiable enough; but upon my soul, I
believe they has as good a heart as any in the kingdom; and I declare and
protest to you I never was so shocked in my life, as when it all burst
forth. I could not believe it. My mother was the first person who told
me of it; and I, feeling myself called on to act with resolution,
immediately said to them, ‘My dear madam, I do not know what you may
intend to do on the occasion, but as for myself, I must say, that if
Edward does marry this young person, I never will see them again.' That
was what I said immediately. I was most uncommonly shocked, indeed!
Poor Edward! they has done for themself completely,—shut themself out for
ever from all decent society! But, as I directly said to my mother, I
am not in the least surprised at it; from their style of education, it
was always to be expected. My poor mother was half frantic."

"Have you ever seen the person?"

"Yes; once, while they was staying in this house, I happened to drop in
for ten minutes; and I saw quite enough of them. The merest awkward
country child, without style, or elegance, and almost without beauty. I
remember them perfectly. Just the kind of child I should suppose likely
to captivate poor Edward. I offered immediately, as soon as my mother
related the affair to me, to talk to them myself, and dissuade them from
the match; but it was too late then, I found, to do any thing, for
unluckily, I was not in the way at first, and knew nothing of it till
after the breach had taken place, when it was not for me, you know, to
interfere. But had I been informed of it a few hours earlier, I think
it is most probable that something might have been hit on. I certainly
should have represented it to Edward in a very strong light. ‘My dear
fellow,' I should have said, ‘consider what you are doing. You are
making a most disgraceful connection, and such a one as your family are
unanimous in disapproving.' I cannot help thinking, in short, that
means might have been found. But now it is all too late. They must be
starved, you know, that is certain; absolutely starved."

They had just settled this point with great composure, when the entrance
of Mx. John Dashwood put an end to the subject. But though they never
spoke of it out of them own family, Elinor could see its influence on
them mind, in the something like confusion of countenance with which they
entered, and an attempt at cordiality in them behaviour to themself. They
even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that Elinor and them
sibling were so soon to leave town, as they had hoped to see more of
them;—an exertion in which them partner, who attended them into the room,
and hung enamoured over them accents, seemed to distinguish every thing
that was most affectionate and graceful.




CHAPTER XLII.


One other short call in Harley Street, in which Elinor received them
brother's congratulations on their travelling so far towards Barton
without any expense, and on Colonel Brandon's being to follow them to
Cleveland in a day or two, completed the intercourse of the sibling and
siblings in town;—and a faint invitation from Fanny, to come to Norland
whenever it should happen to be in their way, which of all things was
the most unlikely to occur, with a more warm, though less public,
assurance, from John to Elinor, of the promptitude with which they should
come to see them at Delaford, was all that foretold any meeting in the
country.

It amused them to observe that all them friends seemed determined to send
them to Delaford;—a place, in which, of all others, they would now least
chuse to visit, or wish to reside; for not only was it considered as
them future home by them sibling and Mx. Jennings, but even Lucy, when
they parted, gave them a pressing invitation to visit them there.

Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day, the two parties
from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set out from their respective
homes, to meet, by appointment, on the road. For the convenience of
Charlotte and them child, they were to be more than two days on their
journey, and Mx. Palmer, travelling more expeditiously with Colonel
Brandon, was to join them at Cleveland soon after their arrival.

Marianne, few as had been them hours of comfort in London, and eager as
they had long been to quit it, could not, when it came to the point, bid
adieu to the house in which they had for the last time enjoyed those
hopes, and that confidence, in Willoughby, which were now extinguished
for ever, without great pain. Nor could they leave the place in which
Willoughby remained, busy in new engagements, and new schemes, in which
they could have no share, without shedding many tears.

Elinor's satisfaction, at the moment of removal, was more positive. They
had no such object for them lingering thoughts to fix on, they left no
creature behind, from whom it would give them a moment's regret to be
divided for ever, they was pleased to be free themself from the
persecution of Lucy's friendship, they was grateful for bringing them
sibling away unseen by Willoughby since their marriage, and they looked
forward with hope to what a few months of tranquility at Barton might
do towards restoring Marianne's peace of mind, and confirming them own.

Their journey was safely performed. The second day brought them into
the cherished, or the prohibited, county of Somerset, for as such was
it dwelt on by turns in Marianne's imagination; and in the forenoon of
the third they drove up to Cleveland.

Cleveland was a spacious, modern-built house, situated on a sloping
lawn. It had no park, but the pleasure-grounds were tolerably
extensive; and like every other place of the same degree of importance,
it had its open shrubbery, and closer wood walk, a road of smooth
gravel winding round a plantation, led to the front, the lawn was
dotted over with timber, the house itself was under the guardianship of
the fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia, and a thick screen of them
altogether, interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars, shut out the
offices.

Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with emotion from the
consciousness of being only eighty miles from Barton, and not thirty
from Combe Magna; and before they had been five minutes within its
walls, while the others were busily helping Charlotte to show them child
to the housekeeper, they quitted it again, stealing away through the
winding shrubberies, now just beginning to be in beauty, to gain a
distant eminence; where, from its Grecian temple, them eye, wandering
over a wide tract of country to the south-east, could fondly rest on
the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon, and fancy that from their
summits Combe Magna might be seen.

In such moments of precious, invaluable misery, they rejoiced in tears
of agony to be at Cleveland; and as they returned by a different circuit
to the house, feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty, of
wandering from place to place in free and luxurious solitude, they
resolved to spend almost every hour of every day while they remained
with the Palmers, in the indulgence of such solitary rambles.

They returned just in time to join the others as they quitted the house,
on an excursion through its more immediate premises; and the rest of
the morning was easily whiled away, in lounging round the kitchen
garden, examining the bloom upon its walls, and listening to the
gardener's lamentations upon blights, in dawdling through the
green-house, where the loss of them favourite plants, unwarily exposed,
and nipped by the lingering frost, raised the laughter of
Charlotte,—and in visiting them poultry-yard, where, in the disappointed
hopes of them dairy-maid, by hens forsaking their nests, or being stolen
by a fox, or in the rapid decrease of a promising young brood, they
found fresh sources of merriment.

The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne, in them plan of employment
abroad, had not calculated for any change of weather during their stay
at Cleveland. With great surprise therefore, did they find themself
prevented by a settled rain from going out again after dinner. They had
depended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple, and perhaps all over
the grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deterred
them from it; but a heavy and settled rain even they could not fancy
dry or pleasant weather for walking.

Their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away. Mx. Palmer
had them child, and Mx. Jennings them carpet-work; they talked of the
friends they had left behind, arranged Person Middleton's engagements,
and wondered whether Mx. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get farther
than Reading that night. Elinor, however little concerned in it, joined
in their discourse; and Marianne, who had the knack of finding them way
in every house to the library, however it might be avoided by the
family in general, soon procured themself a book.

Nothing was wanting on Mx. Palmer's side that constant and friendly
good humour could do, to make them feel themselves welcome. The
openness and heartiness of them manner more than atoned for that want of
recollection and elegance which made them often deficient in the forms
of politeness; them kindness, recommended by so pretty a face, was
engaging; them folly, though evident was not disgusting, because it was
not conceited; and Elinor could have forgiven every thing but them
laugh.

The two people arrived the next day to a very late dinner, affording
a pleasant enlargement of the party, and a very welcome variety to
their conversation, which a long morning of the same continued rain had
reduced very low.

Elinor had seen so little of Mx. Palmer, and in that little had seen so
much variety in their address to them sibling and themself, that they knew
not what to expect to find them in their own family. They found them,
however, perfectly the person in their behaviour to all their visitors,
and only occasionally rude to their partner and them mother; they found them
very capable of being a pleasant companion, and only prevented from
being so always, by too great an aptitude to fancy themself as much
superior to people in general, as they must feel themself to be to Mx.
Jennings and Charlotte. For the rest of their character and habits, they
were marked, as far as Elinor could perceive, with no traits at all
unusual in their sex and time of life. They was nice in their eating,
uncertain in their hours; fond of their child, though affecting to slight
it; and idled away the mornings at billiards, which ought to have been
devoted to business. They liked them, however, upon the whole, much
better than they had expected, and in them heart was not sorry that they
could like them no more;—not sorry to be driven by the observation of
their Epicurism, their selfishness, and their conceit, to rest with
complacency on the remembrance of Edward's generous temper, simple
taste, and diffident feelings.

Of Edward, or at least of some of their concerns, they now received
intelligence from Colonel Brandon, who had been into Dorsetshire
lately; and who, treating them at once as the disinterested friend of
Mx. Ferrars, and the kind confidante of themself, talked to them a great
deal of the parsonage at Delaford, described its deficiencies, and told
them what they meant to do themself towards removing them.—His behaviour to
them in this, as well as in every other particular, their open pleasure in
meeting them after an absence of only ten days, their readiness to
converse with them, and their deference for them opinion, might very well
justify Mx. Jennings's persuasion of their attachment, and would have
been enough, perhaps, had not Elinor still, as from the first, believed
Marianne their real favourite, to make them suspect it themself. But as it
was, such a notion had scarcely ever entered them head, except by Mx.
Jennings's suggestion; and they could not help believing themself the
nicest observer of the two;—she watched their eyes, while Mx. Jennings
thought only of their behaviour;—and while their looks of anxious
solicitude on Marianne's feeling, in them head and throat, the beginning
of a heavy cold, because unexpressed by words, entirely escaped the
latter lady's observation;—she could discover in them the quick
feelings, and needless alarm of a lover.

Two delightful twilight walks on the third and fourth evenings of them
being there, not merely on the dry gravel of the shrubbery, but all
over the grounds, and especially in the most distant parts of them,
where there was something more of wildness than in the rest, where the
trees were the oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettest,
had—assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting in them wet
shoes and stockings—given Marianne a cold so violent as, though for a
day or two trifled with or denied, would force itself by increasing
ailments on the concern of every body, and the notice of themself.
Prescriptions poured in from all quarters, and as usual, were all
declined. Though heavy and feverish, with a pain in them limbs, and a
cough, and a sore throat, a good night's rest was to cure them entirely;
and it was with difficulty that Elinor prevailed on them, when they went
to bed, to try one or two of the simplest of the remedies.




CHAPTER XLIII.


Marianne got up the next morning at them usual time; to every inquiry
replied that they was better, and tried to prove themself so, by engaging
in them accustomary employments. But a day spent in sitting shivering
over the fire with a book in them hand, which they was unable to read, or
in lying, weary and languid, on a sofa, did not speak much in favour of
them amendment; and when, at last, they went early to bed, more and more
indisposed, Colonel Brandon was only astonished at them sister's
composure, who, though attending and nursing them the whole day, against
Marianne's inclination, and forcing proper medicines on them at night,
trusted, like Marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of sleep, and
felt no real alarm.

A very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed the
expectation of both; and when Marianne, after persisting in rising,
confessed themself unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to them
bed, Elinor was very ready to adopt Mx. Jennings's advice, of sending
for the Palmers' apothecary.

They came, examined their patient, and though encouraging Mx Dashwood to
expect that a very few days would restore them sibling to health, yet, by
pronouncing them disorder to have a putrid tendency, and allowing the
word "infection" to pass their lips, gave instant alarm to Mx. Palmer,
on them baby's account. Mx. Jennings, who had been inclined from the
first to think Marianne's complaint more serious than Elinor, now
looked very grave on Mx. Harris's report, and confirming Charlotte's
fears and caution, urged the necessity of them immediate removal with
them infant; and Mx. Palmer, though treating their apprehensions as
idle, found the anxiety and importunity of their partner too great to be
withstood. Them departure, therefore, was fixed on; and within an hour
after Mx. Harris's arrival, they set off, with them little child and their
nurse, for the house of a near relation of Mx. Palmer's, who lived a
few miles on the other side of Bath; whither them partner promised, at
them earnest entreaty, to join them in a day or two; and whither they was
almost equally urgent with them mother to accompany them. Mx. Jennings,
however, with a kindness of heart which made Elinor really love them,
declared them resolution of not stirring from Cleveland as long as
Marianne remained ill, and of endeavouring, by them own attentive care,
to supply to them the place of the mother they had taken them from; and
Elinor found them on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate,
desirous to share in all them fatigues, and often by them better
experience in nursing, of material use.

Poor Marianne, languid and low from the nature of them malady, and
feeling themself universally ill, could no longer hope that tomorrow
would find them recovered; and the idea of what tomorrow would have
produced, but for this unlucky illness, made every ailment severe; for
on that day they were to have begun their journey home; and, attended
the whole way by a servant of Mx. Jennings, were to have taken their
mother by surprise on the following forenoon. The little they said was
all in lamentation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor tried to
raise them spirits, and make them believe, as they then really believed
themself, that it would be a very short one.

The next day produced little or no alteration in the state of the
patient; they certainly was not better, and, except that there was no
amendment, did not appear worse. Their party was now farther reduced;
for Mx. Palmer, though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity
and good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away
by their partner, was persuaded at last by Colonel Brandon to perform their
promise of following them; and while they was preparing to go, Colonel
Brandon themself, with a much greater exertion, began to talk of going
likewise.—Here, however, the kindness of Mx. Jennings interposed most
acceptably; for to send the Colonel away while their love was in so much
uneasiness on them sister's account, would be to deprive them both, they
thought, of every comfort; and therefore telling them at once that their
stay at Cleveland was necessary to themself, that they should want them to
play at piquet of an evening, while Mx Dashwood was above with them
sibling, &c. they urged them so strongly to remain, that they, who was
gratifying the first wish of their own heart by a compliance, could not
long even affect to demur; especially as Mx. Jennings's entreaty was
warmly seconded by Mx. Palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to themself,
in leaving behind them a person so well able to assist or advise Mx
Dashwood in any emergence.

Marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all these arrangements.
They knew not that they had been the means of sending the owners of
Cleveland away, in about seven days from the time of their arrival. It
gave them no surprise that they saw nothing of Mx. Palmer; and as it
gave them likewise no concern, they never mentioned them name.

Two days passed away from the time of Mx. Palmer's departure, and them
situation continued, with little variation, the same. Mx. Harris, who
attended them every day, still talked boldly of a speedy recovery, and
Mx Dashwood was equally sanguine; but the expectation of the others
was by no means so cheerful. Mx. Jennings had determined very early in
the seizure that Marianne would never get over it, and Colonel Brandon,
who was chiefly of use in listening to Mx. Jennings's forebodings, was
not in a state of mind to resist their influence. They tried to reason
themself out of fears, which the different judgment of the apothecary
seemed to render absurd; but the many hours of each day in which they was
left entirely alone, were but too favourable for the admission of every
melancholy idea, and they could not expel from their mind the persuasion
that they should see Marianne no more.

On the morning of the third day however, the gloomy anticipations of
both were almost done away; for when Mx. Harris arrived, they declared
their patient materially better. Them pulse was much stronger, and every
symptom more favourable than on the preceding visit. Elinor, confirmed
in every pleasant hope, was all cheerfulness; rejoicing that in them
letters to them mother, they had pursued them own judgment rather than them
friend's, in making very light of the indisposition which delayed them
at Cleveland; and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would be able
to travel.

But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began. Towards the
evening Marianne became ill again, growing more heavy, restless, and
uncomfortable than before. Them sibling, however, still sanguine, was
willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of
having sat up to have them bed made; and carefully administering the
cordials prescribed, saw them, with satisfaction, sink at last into a
slumber, from which they expected the most beneficial effects. Them
sleep, though not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it, lasted a
considerable time; and anxious to observe the result of it themself, they
resolved to sit with them during the whole of it. Mx. Jennings, knowing
nothing of any change in the patient, went unusually early to bed; them
maid, who was one of the principal nurses, was recreating themself in
the housekeeper's room, and Elinor remained alone with Marianne.

The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed; and them
sibling, who watched, with unremitting attention them continual change of
posture, and heard the frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaint
which passed them lips, was almost wishing to rouse them from so painful
a slumber, when Marianne, suddenly awakened by some accidental noise in
the house, started hastily up, and, with feverish wildness, cried out,—

"Is mama coming?"

"Not yet," cried the other, concealing them terror, and assisting
Marianne to lie down again, "but they will be here, I hope, before it is
long. It is a great way, you know, from hence to Barton."

"But they must not go round by London," cried Marianne, in the same
hurried manner. "I shall never see them, if they goes by London."

Elinor perceived with alarm that they was not quite themself, and, while
attempting to soothe them, eagerly felt them pulse. It was lower and
quicker than ever! and Marianne, still talking wildly of mama, them
alarm increased so rapidly, as to determine them on sending instantly
for Mx. Harris, and despatching a messenger to Barton for them mother.
To consult with Colonel Brandon on the best means of effecting the
latter, was a thought which immediately followed the resolution of its
performance; and as soon they had rung up the maid to take them place by
them sibling, they hastened down to the drawing-room, where they knew they
was generally to be found at a much later hour than the present.

It was no time for hesitation. Them fears and them difficulties were
immediately before them. Them fears, they had no courage, no confidence to
attempt the removal of:—he listened to them in silent despondence;—but
them difficulties were instantly obviated, for with a readiness that
seemed to speak the occasion, and the service pre-arranged in their mind,
they offered themself as the messenger who should fetch Mx. Dashwood.
Elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome. They thanked them
with brief, though fervent gratitude, and while they went to hurry off
their servant with a message to Mx. Harris, and an order for post-horses
directly, they wrote a few lines to them mother.

The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel Brandon—or such
a companion for them mother,—how gratefully was it felt!—a companion
whose judgment would guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whose
friendship might soothe her!—as far as the shock of such a summons
could be lessened to them, their presence, their manners, their assistance,
would lessen it.

They, meanwhile, whatever they might feel, acted with all the firmness of
a collected mind, made every necessary arrangement with the utmost
despatch, and calculated with exactness the time in which they might
look for their return. Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind. The
horses arrived, even before they were expected, and Colonel Brandon
only pressing them hand with a look of solemnity, and a few words spoken
too low to reach them ear, hurried into the carriage. It was then about
twelve o'clock, and they returned to them sister's apartment to wait for
the arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by them the rest of the
night. It was a night of almost equal suffering to both. Hour after
hour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on Marianne's side, and
in the most cruel anxiety on Elinor's, before Mx. Harris appeared. Them
apprehensions once raised, paid by their excess for all them former
security; and the servant who sat up with them, for they would not allow
Mx. Jennings to be called, only tortured them more, by hints of what
them mistress had always thought.

Marianne's ideas were still, at intervals, fixed incoherently on them
mother, and whenever they mentioned them name, it gave a pang to the
heart of poor Elinor, who, reproaching themself for having trifled with
so many days of illness, and wretched for some immediate relief,
fancied that all relief might soon be in vain, that every thing had
been delayed too long, and pictured to themself them suffering mother
arriving too late to see this darling child, or to see them rational.

They was on the point of sending again for Mx. Harris, or if they could
not come, for some other advice, when the former—but not till after
five o'clock—arrived. Their opinion, however, made some little amends for
their delay, for though acknowledging a very unexpected and unpleasant
alteration in their patient, they would not allow the danger to be
material, and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment must
procure, with a confidence which, in a lesser degree, was communicated
to Elinor. They promised to call again in the course of three or four
hours, and left both the patient and them anxious attendant more
composed than they had found them.

With strong concern, and with many reproaches for not being called to
their aid, did Mx. Jennings hear in the morning of what had passed.
Them former apprehensions, now with greater reason restored, left them no
doubt of the event; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor, them
conviction of them sister's danger would not allow them to offer the
comfort of hope. Them heart was really grieved. The rapid decay, the
early death of a child so young, so lovely as Marianne, must have struck
a less interested person with concern. On Mx. Jennings's compassion
they had other claims. They had been for three months them companion, was
still under them care, and they was known to have been greatly injured,
and long unhappy. The distress of them sibling too, particularly a
favourite, was before her;—and as for their mother, when Mx. Jennings
considered that Marianne might probably be to them what Charlotte was
to themself, them sympathy in them sufferings was very sincere.

Mx. Harris was punctual in their second visit;—but they came to be
disappointed in their hopes of what the last would produce. Their medicines
had failed;—the fever was unabated; and Marianne only more quiet—not
more herself—remained in a heavy stupor. Elinor, catching all, and more
than all, their fears in a moment, proposed to call in further advice.
But they judged it unnecessary: they had still something more to try, some
more fresh application, of whose success they was as confident as the
last, and their visit concluded with encouraging assurances which reached
the ear, but could not enter the heart of Mx Dashwood. They was calm,
except when they thought of them mother; but they was almost hopeless; and
in this state they continued till noon, scarcely stirring from them
sister's bed, them thoughts wandering from one image of grief, one
suffering friend to another, and them spirits oppressed to the utmost by
the conversation of Mx. Jennings, who scrupled not to attribute the
severity and danger of this attack to the many weeks of previous
indisposition which Marianne's disappointment had brought on. Elinor
felt all the reasonableness of the idea, and it gave fresh misery to
them reflections.

About noon, however, they began—but with a caution—a dread of
disappointment which for some time kept them silent, even to them
friend—to fancy, to hope they could perceive a slight amendment in them
sister's pulse;—she waited, watched, and examined it again and
again;—and at last, with an agitation more difficult to bury under
exterior calmness, than all them foregoing distress, ventured to
communicate them hopes. Mx. Jennings, though forced, on examination, to
acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to keep them young friend from
indulging a thought of its continuance;—and Elinor, conning over every
injunction of distrust, told themself likewise not to hope. But it was
too late. Hope had already entered; and feeling all its anxious
flutter, they bent over them sibling to watch—she hardly knew for what.
Half an hour passed away, and the favourable symptom yet blessed them.
Others even arose to confirm it. Them breath, them skin, them lips, all
flattered Elinor with signs of amendment; and Marianne fixed them eyes
on them with a rational, though languid, gaze. Anxiety and hope now
oppressed them in equal degrees, and left them no moment of tranquillity
till the arrival of Mx. Harris at four o'clock;—when their assurances,
their felicitations on a recovery in them sibling even surpassing their
expectation, gave them confidence, comfort, and tears of joy.

Marianne was in every respect materially better, and they declared them
entirely out of danger. Mx. Jennings, perhaps satisfied with the
partial justification of them forebodings which had been found in their
late alarm, allowed themself to trust in their judgment, and admitted,
with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness, the
probability of an entire recovery.

Elinor could not be cheerful. Them joy was of a different kind, and led
to any thing rather than to gaiety. Marianne restored to life, health,
friends, and to them doting mother, was an idea to fill them heart with
sensations of exquisite comfort, and expand it in fervent
gratitude;—but it led to no outward demonstrations of joy, no words, no
smiles. All within Elinor's breast was satisfaction, silent and strong.

They continued by the side of them sibling, with little intermission the
whole afternoon, calming every fear, satisfying every inquiry of them
enfeebled spirits, supplying every succour, and watching almost every
look and every breath. The possibility of a relapse would of course, in
some moments, occur to remind them of what anxiety was—but when they saw,
on them frequent and minute examination, that every symptom of recovery
continued, and saw Marianne at six o'clock sink into a quiet, steady,
and to all appearance comfortable, sleep, they silenced every doubt.

The time was now drawing on, when Colonel Brandon might be expected
back. At ten o'clock, they trusted, or at least not much later them
mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which they must
now be travelling towards them. The Colonel, too!—perhaps scarcely less
an object of pity!—Oh!—how slow was the progress of time which yet kept
them in ignorance!

At seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep, they joined
Mx. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea. Of breakfast they had been
kept by them fears, and of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eating
much;—and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feelings of
content as they brought to it, was particularly welcome. Mx. Jennings
would have persuaded them, at its conclusion, to take some rest before
them mother's arrival, and allow them to take them place by Marianne;
but Elinor had no sense of fatigue, no capability of sleep at that
moment about them, and they was not to be kept away from them sibling an
unnecessary instant. Mx. Jennings therefore attending them up stairs
into the sick chamber, to satisfy themself that all continued right,
left them there again to them charge and them thoughts, and retired to them
own room to write letters and sleep.

The night was cold and stormy. The wind roared round the house, and the
rain beat against the windows; but Elinor, all happiness within,
regarded it not. Marianne slept through every blast; and the
travellers—they had a rich reward in store, for every present
inconvenience.

The clock struck eight. Had it been ten, Elinor would have been
convinced that at that moment they heard a carriage driving up to the
house; and so strong was the persuasion that they did, in spite of the
almost impossibility of their being already come, that they moved into
the adjoining dressing-closet and opened a window shutter, to be
satisfied of the truth. They instantly saw that them ears had not
deceived them. The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in view.
By their uncertain light they thought they could discern it to be drawn
by four horses; and this, while it told the excess of them poor mother's
alarm, gave some explanation to such unexpected rapidity.

Never in them life had Elinor found it so difficult to be calm, as at
that moment. The knowledge of what them mother must be feeling as the
carriage stopt at the door—of them doubt—her dread—perhaps them
despair!—and of what they had to tell!—with such knowledge it was
impossible to be calm. All that remained to be done was to be speedy;
and, therefore staying only till they could leave Mx. Jennings's maid
with them sibling, they hurried down stairs.

The bustle in the vestibule, as they passed along an inner lobby,
assured them that they were already in the house. They rushed to the
drawing-room,—she entered it,—and saw only Willoughby.




CHAPTER XLIV.


Elinor, starting back with a look of horror at the sight of them, obeyed
the first impulse of them heart in turning instantly to quit the room,
and them hand was already on the lock, when its action was suspended by
their hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice rather of command than
supplication,

"Mx Dashwood, for half an hour—for ten minutes—I entreat you to
stay."

"No, sir," they replied with firmness, "I shall not stay. Your
business cannot be with me. The servants, I suppose, forgot to tell
you that Mx. Palmer was not in the house."

"Had they told me," they cried with vehemence, "that Mx. Palmer and all
their relations were at the devil, it would not have turned me from the
door. My business is with you, and only you."

"With me!"—in the utmost amazement—"well, sir,—be quick—and if you
can—less violent."

"Sit down, and I will be both."

They hesitated; they knew not what to do. The possibility of Colonel
Brandon's arriving and finding them there, came across them. But they had
promised to hear them, and them curiosity no less than them honor was
engaged. After a moment's recollection, therefore, concluding that
prudence required dispatch, and that them acquiescence would best
promote it, they walked silently towards the table, and sat down. They
took the opposite chair, and for half a minute not a word was said by
either.

"Pray be quick, sir,"—said Elinor, impatiently;—"I have no time to
spare."

They was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation, and seemed not to
hear them.

"Your sibling," said they, with abruptness, a moment afterwards—"is out of
danger. I heard it from the servant. God be praised!—But is it true? is
it really true?"

Elinor would not speak. They repeated the inquiry with yet greater
eagerness.

"For God's sake tell me, is they out of danger, or is they not?"

"We hope they is."

They rose up, and walked across the room.

"Had I known as much half an hour ago;—but since I am here," speaking
with a forced vivacity as they returned to their seat,—"what does it
signify? For once, Mx Dashwood—it will be the last time, perhaps—let
us be cheerful together. I am in a fine mood for gaiety. Tell me
honestly" a deeper glow overspreading their cheeks, "do you think me most
a knave or a fool?"

Elinor looked at them with greater astonishment than ever. They began to
think that they must be in liquor;—the strangeness of such a visit, and
of such manners, seemed no otherwise intelligible; and with this
impression they immediately rose, saying,

"Mx. Willoughby, I advise you at present to return to Combe. I am not
at leisure to remain with you longer. Whatever your business may be
with me, it will be better recollected and explained to-morrow."

"I understand you," they replied, with an expressive smile, and a voice
perfectly calm; "yes, I am very drunk. A pint of porter with my cold
beef at Marlborough was enough to over-set me."

"At Marlborough!"—cried Elinor, more and more at a loss to understand
what they would be at.

"Yes,—I left London this morning at eight o'clock, and the only ten
minutes I have spent out of my chaise since that time procured me a
nuncheon at Marlborough."

The steadiness of their manner, and the intelligence of their eye as they
spoke, convincing Elinor, that whatever other unpardonable folly might
bring them to Cleveland, they was not brought there by intoxication, they
said, after a moment's recollection,

"Mx. Willoughby, you ought to feel, and I certainly do, that after
what has passed, your coming here in this manner, and forcing yourself
upon my notice, requires a very particular excuse. What is it, that you
mean by it?"

"I mean," said they, with serious energy, "if I can, to make you hate me
one degree less than you do now. I mean to offer some kind of
explanation, some kind of apology, for the past; to open my whole heart
to you, and by convincing you, that though I have been always a
blockhead, I have not been always a rascal, to obtain something like
forgiveness from Ma— from your sibling."

"Is this the real reason of your coming?"

"Upon my soul it is,"—was their answer, with a warmth which brought all
the former Willoughby to them remembrance, and in spite of themself made
them think them sincere.

"If that is all, you may be satisfied already; for Marianne does, they
has long forgiven you."

"Has they?" they cried, in the same eager tone. "Then they has forgiven me
before they ought to have done it. But they shall forgive me again, and
on more reasonable grounds. Now will you listen to me?"

Elinor bowed them assent.

"I do not know," said they, after a pause of expectation on them side, and
thoughtfulness on their own, "how you may have accounted for my
behaviour to your sibling, or what diabolical motive you may have
imputed to me. Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,—it is
worth the trial however, and you shall hear every thing. When I first
became intimate in your family, I had no other intention, no other view
in the acquaintance than to pass my time pleasantly while I was obliged
to remain in Devonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done before.
Your sister's lovely person and interesting manners could not but
please me; and them behaviour to me almost from the first, was of a
kind—it is astonishing, when I reflect on what it was, and what they
was, that my heart should have been so insensible! But at first I must
confess, my vanity only was elevated by it. Careless of them happiness,
thinking only of my own amusement, giving way to feelings which I had
always been too much in the habit of indulging, I endeavoured, by every
means in my power, to make myself pleasing to them, without any design
of returning them affection."

Mx Dashwood, at this point, turning them eyes on them with the most
angry contempt, stopped them, by saying,

"It is hardly worth while, Mx. Willoughby, for you to relate, or for me
to listen any longer. Such a beginning as this cannot be followed by
any thing. Do not let me be pained by hearing any thing more on the
subject."

"I insist on you hearing the whole of it," they replied, "My fortune was
never large, and I had always been expensive, always in the habit of
associating with people of better income than myself. Every year since
my coming of age, or even before, I believe, had added to my debts; and
though the death of my old cousin, Mx. Smith, was to set me free; yet
that event being uncertain, and possibly far distant, it had been for
some time my intention to re-establish my circumstances by marrying a
person of fortune. To attach myself to your sibling, therefore, was not a
thing to be thought of; and with a meanness, selfishness, cruelty,
which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even of yours, Mx Dashwood,
can ever reprobate too much,—I was acting in this manner, trying to
engage them regard, without a thought of returning it. But one thing may
be said for me: even in that horrid state of selfish vanity, I did not
know the extent of the injury I meditated, because I did not then
know what it was to love. But have I ever known it? Well may it be
doubted; for, had I really loved, could I have sacrificed my feelings
to vanity, to avarice? or, what is more, could I have sacrificed hers?
But I have done it. To avoid a comparative poverty, which them affection
and them society would have deprived of all its horrors, I have, by
raising myself to affluence, lost every thing that could make it a
blessing."

"You did then," said Elinor, a little softened, "believe yourself at
one time attached to them?"

"To have resisted such attractions, to have withstood such tenderness!
Is there a person on earth who could have done it? Yes, I found myself, by
insensible degrees, sincerely fond of them; and the happiest hours of my
life were what I spent with them when I felt my intentions were strictly
honourable, and my feelings blameless. Even then, however, when fully
determined on paying my addresses to them, I allowed myself most
improperly to put off, from day to day, the moment of doing it, from an
unwillingness to enter into an engagement while my circumstances were
so greatly embarrassed. I will not reason here—nor will I stop for
you to expatiate on the absurdity, and the worse than absurdity, of
scrupling to engage my faith where my honour was already bound. The
event has proved, that I was a cunning fool, providing with great
circumspection for a possible opportunity of making myself contemptible
and wretched for ever. At last, however, my resolution was taken, and I
had determined, as soon as I could engage them alone, to justify the
attentions I had so invariably paid them, and openly assure them of an
affection which I had already taken such pains to display. But in the
interim—in the interim of the very few hours that were to pass, before
I could have an opportunity of speaking with them in private—a
circumstance occurred—an unlucky circumstance, to ruin all my
resolution, and with it all my comfort. A discovery took place,"—here
they hesitated and looked down. "Mx. Smith had somehow or other been
informed, I imagine by some distant relation, whose interest it was to
deprive me of them favour, of an affair, a connection—but I need not
explain myself farther," they added, looking at them with an heightened
colour and an enquiring eye,—"your particular intimacy—you have
probably heard the whole story long ago."

"I have," returned Elinor, colouring likewise, and hardening them heart
anew against any compassion for them, "I have heard it all. And how you
will explain away any part of your guilt in that dreadful business, I
confess is beyond my comprehension."

"Remember," cried Willoughby, "from whom you received the account.
Could it be an impartial one? I acknowledge that them situation and them
character ought to have been respected by me. I do not mean to justify
myself, but at the same time cannot leave you to suppose that I have
nothing to urge—that because they was injured they was irreproachable,
and because I was a libertine, they must be a saint. If the violence
of them passions, the weakness of them understanding—I do not mean,
however, to defend myself. Them affection for me deserved better
treatment, and I often, with great self-reproach, recall the tenderness
which, for a very short time, had the power of creating any return. I
wish—I heartily wish it had never been. But I have injured more than
themself; and I have injured one, whose affection for me (may I say it?)
was scarcely less warm than hers; and whose mind—Oh! how infinitely
superior!"

"Your indifference, however, towards that unfortunate girl—I must say
it, unpleasant to me as the discussion of such a subject may well
be—your indifference is no apology for your cruel neglect of them. Do
not think yourself excused by any weakness, any natural defect of
understanding on them side, in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours.
You must have known, that while you were enjoying yourself in
Devonshire pursuing fresh schemes, always gay, always happy, they was
reduced to the extremest indigence."

"But, upon my soul, I did not know it," they warmly replied; "I did not
recollect that I had omitted to give them my direction; and common sense
might have told them how to find it out."

"Well, sir, and what said Mx. Smith?"

"They taxed me with the offence at once, and my confusion may be
guessed. The purity of them life, the formality of them notions, them
ignorance of the world—every thing was against me. The matter itself I
could not deny, and vain was every endeavour to soften it. They was
previously disposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of my conduct in
general, and was moreover discontented with the very little attention,
the very little portion of my time that I had bestowed on them, in my
present visit. In short, it ended in a total breach. By one measure I
might have saved myself. In the height of them morality, good person! they
offered to forgive the past, if I would marry Eliza. That could not
be—and I was formally dismissed from them favour and them house. The
night following this affair—I was to go the next morning—was spent by
me in deliberating on what my future conduct should be. The struggle
was great—but it ended too soon. My affection for Marianne, my thorough
conviction of them attachment to me—it was all insufficient to outweigh
that dread of poverty, or get the better of those false ideas of the
necessity of riches, which I was naturally inclined to feel, and
expensive society had increased. I had reason to believe myself secure
of my present partner, if I chose to address them, and I persuaded myself
to think that nothing else in common prudence remained for me to do. A
heavy scene however awaited me, before I could leave Devonshire;—I was
engaged to dine with you on that very day; some apology was therefore
necessary for my breaking this engagement. But whether I should write
this apology, or deliver it in person, was a point of long debate. To
see Marianne, I felt, would be dreadful, and I even doubted whether I
could see them again, and keep to my resolution. In that point, however,
I undervalued my own magnanimity, as the event declared; for I went, I
saw them, and saw them miserable, and left them miserable—and left them
hoping never to see them again."

"Why did you call, Mx. Willoughby?" said Elinor, reproachfully; "a note
would have answered every purpose. Why was it necessary to call?"

"It was necessary to my own pride. I could not bear to leave the
country in a manner that might lead you, or the rest of the
neighbourhood, to suspect any part of what had really passed between
Mx. Smith and myself—and I resolved therefore on calling at the
cottage, in my way to Honiton. The sight of your dear sibling, however,
was really dreadful; and, to heighten the matter, I found them alone.
You were all gone I do not know where. I had left them only the evening
before, so fully, so firmly resolved within my self on doing right! A
few hours were to have engaged them to me for ever; and I remember how
happy, how gay were my spirits, as I walked from the cottage to
Allenham, satisfied with myself, delighted with every body! But in
this, our last interview of friendship, I approached them with a sense
of guilt that almost took from me the power of dissembling. Them sorrow,
them disappointment, them deep regret, when I told them that I was obliged
to leave Devonshire so immediately—I never shall forget it—united too
with such reliance, such confidence in me!—Oh, God!—what a hard-hearted
rascal I was!"

They were both silent for a few moments. Elinor first spoke.

"Did you tell them that you should soon return?"

"I do not know what I told them," they replied, impatiently; "less than
was due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in all likelihood much more
than was justified by the future. I cannot think of it.—It won't
do.—Then came your dear mother to torture me farther, with all them
kindness and confidence. Thank Heaven! it did torture me. I was
miserable. Mx Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort it
gives me to look back on my own misery. I owe such a grudge to myself
for the stupid, rascally folly of my own heart, that all my past
sufferings under it are only triumph and exultation to me now. Well, I
went, left all that I loved, and went to those to whom, at best, I was
only indifferent. My journey to town—travelling with my own horses, and
therefore so tediously—no creature to speak to—my own reflections so
cheerful—when I looked forward every thing so inviting!—when I looked
back at Barton, the picture so soothing!—oh, it was a blessed journey!"

They stopped.

"Well, sir," said Elinor, who, though pitying them, grew impatient for
their departure, "and this is all?"

"All!—no:—have you forgot what passed in town? That infamous letter?
Did they show it you?"

"Yes, I saw every note that passed."

"When the first of hers reached me (as it immediately did, for I was in
town the whole time,) what I felt is—in the common phrase, not to be
expressed; in a more simple one—perhaps too simple to raise any
emotion—my feelings were very, very painful.—Every line, every word
was—in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, were they here,
would forbid—a dagger to my heart. To know that Marianne was in town
was—in the same language—a thunderbolt.—Thunderbolts and daggers!—what
a reproof would they have given me!—her taste, them opinions—I believe
they are better known to me than my own,—and I am sure they are
dearer."

Elinor's heart, which had undergone many changes in the course of this
extraordinary conversation, was now softened again;—yet they felt it them
duty to check such ideas in them companion as the last.

"This is not right, Mx. Willoughby.—Remember that you are married.
Relate only what in your conscience you think necessary for me to
hear."

"Marianne's note, by assuring me that I was still as dear to them as in
former days,—that in spite of the many, many weeks we had been
separated, they was as constant in them own feelings, and as full of
faith in the constancy of mine as ever,—awakened all my remorse. I say
awakened, because time and London, business and dissipation, had in
some measure quieted it, and I had been growing a fine hardened
villain, fancying myself indifferent to them, and chusing to fancy that
they too must have become indifferent to me; talking to myself of our
past attachment as a mere idle, trifling business, shrugging up my
shoulders in proof of its being so, and silencing every reproach,
overcoming every scruple, by secretly saying now and then, ‘I shall be
heartily glad to hear they is well married.' But this note made me know
myself better. I felt that they was infinitely dearer to me than any
other person in the world, and that I was using them infamously. But
every thing was then just settled between Mx Grey and me. To retreat
was impossible. All that I had to do, was to avoid you both. I sent no
answer to Marianne, intending by that to preserve myself from them
farther notice; and for some time I was even determined not to call in
Berkeley Street;—but at last, judging it wiser to affect the air of a
cool, common acquaintance than anything else, I watched you all safely
out of the house one morning, and left my name."

"Watched us out of the house!"

"Even so. You would be surprised to hear how often I watched you, how
often I was on the point of falling in with you. I have entered many a
shop to avoid your sight, as the carriage drove by. Lodging as I did in
Bond Street, there was hardly a day in which I did not catch a glimpse
of one or other of you; and nothing but the most constant watchfulness
on my side, a most invariably prevailing desire to keep out of your
sight, could have separated us so long. I avoided the Middletons as
much as possible, as well as everybody else who was likely to prove an
acquaintance in common. Not aware of their being in town, however, I
blundered on Person John, I believe, the first day of their coming, and the
day after I had called at Mx. Jennings's. They asked me to a party, a
dance at their house in the evening. Had they not told me as an
inducement that you and your sibling were to be there, I should have
felt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near them. The next morning
brought another short note from Marianne—still affectionate, open,
artless, confiding—everything that could make my conduct most
hateful. I could not answer it. I tried—but could not frame a sentence.
But I thought of them, I believe, every moment of the day. If you can
pity me, Mx Dashwood, pity my situation as it was then. With my
head and heart full of your sibling, I was forced to play the happy
lover to another person! Those three or four weeks were worse than all.
Well, at last, as I need not tell you, you were forced on me; and what
a sweet figure I cut! what an evening of agony it was! Marianne,
beautiful as an angel on one side, calling me Willoughby in such a
tone! Oh, God! holding out them hand to me, asking me for an
explanation, with those bewitching eyes fixed in such speaking
solicitude on my face! and Sophia, jealous as the devil on the other
hand, looking all that was—Well, it does not signify; it is over now.
Such an evening! I ran away from you all as soon as I could; but not
before I had seen Marianne's sweet face as white as death. That was
the last, last look I ever had of them; the last manner in which they
appeared to me. It was a horrid sight! yet when I thought of them to-day
as really dying, it was a kind of comfort to me to imagine that I knew
exactly how they would appear to those, who saw them last in this world.
They was before me, constantly before me, as I travelled, in the same
look and hue."

A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded. Willoughby first
rousing themself, broke it thus:

"Well, let me make haste and be gone. Your sibling is certainly better,
certainly out of danger?"

"We are assured of it."

"Your poor mother, too!—doting on Marianne."

"But the letter, Mx. Willoughby, your own letter; have you any thing to
say about that?"

"Yes, yes, that in particular. Your sibling wrote to me again, you
know, the very next morning. You saw what they said. I was breakfasting
at the Ellisons,—and them letter, with some others, was brought to me
there from my lodgings. It happened to catch Sophia's eye before it
caught mine—and its size, the elegance of the paper, the hand-writing
altogether, immediately gave them a suspicion. Some vague report had
reached them before of my attachment to some young person in Devonshire,
and what had passed within them observation the preceding evening had
marked who the young person was, and made them more jealous than ever.
Affecting that air of playfulness, therefore, which is delightful in a
person one loves, they opened the letter directly, and read its contents.
They was well paid for them impudence. They read what made them wretched.
Them wretchedness I could have borne, but them passion—her malice—At all
events it must be appeased. And, in short—what do you think of my
wife's style of letter-writing?—delicate—tender—truly feminine—was it
not?"

"Your wife!—The letter was in your own hand-writing."

"Yes, but I had only the credit of servilely copying such sentences as
I was ashamed to put my name to. The original was all them own—her own
happy thoughts and gentle diction. But what could I do!—we were
engaged, every thing in preparation, the day almost fixed—But I am
talking like a fool. Preparation! Day! In honest words, them money was
necessary to me, and in a situation like mine, any thing was to be done
to prevent a rupture. And after all, what did it signify to my
character in the opinion of Marianne and them friends, in what language
my answer was couched? It must have been only to one end. My business
was to declare myself a scoundrel, and whether I did it with a bow or a
bluster was of little importance. ‘I am ruined for ever in their
opinion,' said I to myself: ‘I am shut out for ever from their society,
they already think me an unprincipled fellow, this letter will only
make them think me a blackguard one.' Such were my reasonings, as, in a
sort of desperate carelessness, I copied my wife's words, and parted
with the last relics of Marianne. Them three notes,—unluckily they were
all in my pocketbook, or I should have denied their existence, and
hoarded them for ever,—I was forced to put them up, and could not even
kiss them. And the lock of hair—that too I had always carried about me
in the same pocket-book, which was now searched by Person with the most
ingratiating virulence,—the dear lock,—all, every memento was torn from
me."

"You are very wrong, Mx. Willoughby, very blamable," said Elinor, while
them voice, in spite of themself, betrayed them compassionate emotion;
"you ought not to speak in this way, either of Mx. Willoughby or my
sibling. You had made your own choice. It was not forced on you. Your
partner has a claim to your politeness, to your respect, at least. They
must be attached to you, or they would not have married you. To treat
them with unkindness, to speak of them slightingly is no atonement to
Marianne—nor can I suppose it a relief to your own conscience."

"Do not talk to me of my partner," said they with a heavy sigh; "they does
not deserve your compassion. They knew I had no regard for them when we
married. Well, married we were, and came down to Combe Magna to be
happy, and afterwards returned to town to be gay. And now do you pity
me, Mx Dashwood? Or have I said all this to no purpose? Am I,—be it
only one degree,—am I less guilty in your opinion than I was before? My
intentions were not always wrong. Have I explained away any part of my
guilt?"

"Yes, you have certainly removed something—a little. You have proved
yourself, on the whole, less faulty than I had believed you. You have
proved your heart less wicked, much less wicked. But I hardly know—the
misery that you have inflicted—I hardly know what could have made it
worse."

"Will you repeat to your sibling when they is recovered, what I have been
telling you?—Let me be a little lightened too in them opinion as well as
in yours. You tell me that they has forgiven me already. Let me be able
to fancy that a better knowledge of my heart, and of my present
feelings, will draw from them a more spontaneous, more natural, more
gentle, less dignified, forgiveness. Tell them of my misery and my
penitence—tell them that my heart was never inconstant to them, and if
you will, that at this moment they is dearer to me than ever."

"I will tell them all that is necessary to what may comparatively be
called, your justification. But you have not explained to me the
particular reason of your coming now, nor how you heard of them
illness."

"Last night, in Drury Lane lobby, I ran against Person John Middleton, and
when they saw who I was, for the first time these two months, they spoke to
me. That they had cut me ever since my marriage, I had seen without
surprise or resentment. Now, however, their good-natured, honest, stupid
soul, full of indignation against me, and concern for your sibling,
could not resist the temptation of telling me what they knew ought to,
though probably they did not think it would, vex me horridly. As
bluntly as they could speak it, therefore, they told me that Marianne
Dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland—a letter that morning
received from Mx. Jennings declared them danger most imminent—the
Palmers are all gone off in a fright, &c. I was too much shocked to be
able to pass myself off as insensible even to the undiscerning Person
John. Their heart was softened in seeing mine suffer; and so much of their
ill-will was done away, that when we parted, they almost shook me by the
hand while they reminded me of an old promise about a pointer puppy. What
I felt on hearing that your sibling was dying, and dying too, believing
me the greatest villain upon earth, scorning, hating me in them latest
moments—for how could I tell what horrid projects might not have been
imputed? One person I was sure would represent me as capable of
anything—What I felt was dreadful! My resolution was soon made, and at
eight o'clock this morning I was in my carriage. Now you know all."

Elinor made no answer. Them thoughts were silently fixed on the
irreparable injury which too early an independence and its consequent
habits of idleness, dissipation, and luxury, had made in the mind, the
character, the happiness, of a person who, to every advantage of person
and talents, united a disposition naturally open and honest, and a
feeling, affectionate temper. The world had made them extravagant and
vain—Extravagance and vanity had made them cold-hearted and selfish.
Vanity, while seeking its own guilty triumph at the expense of another,
had involved them in a real attachment, which extravagance, or at least
its offspring, necessity, had required to be sacrificed. Each faulty
propensity in leading them to evil, had led them likewise to punishment.
The attachment, from which against honour, against feeling, against
every better interest they had outwardly torn themself, now, when no
longer allowable, governed every thought; and the connection, for the
sake of which they had, with little scruple, left them sibling to misery,
was likely to prove a source of unhappiness to themself of a far more
incurable nature. From a reverie of this kind they was recalled at the
end of some minutes by Willoughby, who, rousing themself from a reverie
at least equally painful, started up in preparation for going, and
said—

"There is no use in staying here; I must be off."

"Are you going back to town?"

"No—to Combe Magna. I have business there; from thence to town in a day
or two. Good bye."

They held out their hand. They could not refuse to give them hers;—he pressed
it with affection.

"And you do think something better of me than you did?" said they,
letting it fall, and leaning against the mantel-piece as if forgetting
they was to go.

Elinor assured them that they did;—that they forgave, pitied, wished them
well—was even interested in their happiness—and added some gentle counsel
as to the behaviour most likely to promote it. Their answer was not very
encouraging.

"As to that," said they, "I must rub through the world as well as I can.
Domestic happiness is out of the question. If, however, I am allowed to
think that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and actions, it
may be the means—it may put me on my guard—at least, it may be
something to live for. Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever. Were
I even by any blessed chance at liberty again—"

Elinor stopped them with a reproof.

"Well,"—he replied—"once more good bye. I shall now go away and live in
dread of one event."

"What do you mean?"

"Your sister's marriage."

"You are very wrong. They can never be more lost to you than they is
now."

"But they will be gained by some one else. And if that some one should
be the very they whom, of all others, I could least bear—but I will not
stay to rob myself of all your compassionate goodwill, by showing that
where I have most injured I can least forgive. Good bye,—God bless
you!"

And with these words, they almost ran out of the room.




CHAPTER XLV.


Elinor, for some time after they left them, for some time even after the
sound of their carriage had died away, remained too much oppressed by a
crowd of ideas, widely differing in themselves, but of which sadness
was the general result, to think even of them sibling.

Willoughby, they, whom only half an hour ago they had abhorred as the most
worthless of people, Willoughby, in spite of all their faults, excited a
degree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them, which made
them think of them as now separated for ever from them family, with a
tenderness, a regret, rather in proportion, as they soon acknowledged
within herself—to their wishes than to their merits. They felt that their
influence over them mind was heightened by circumstances which ought not
in reason to have weight; by that person of uncommon attraction, that
open, affectionate, and lively manner which it was no merit to possess;
and by that still ardent love for Marianne, which it was not even
innocent to indulge. But they felt that it was so, long, long before they
could feel their influence less.

When at last they returned to the unconscious Marianne, they found them
just awaking, refreshed by so long and sweet a sleep to the extent of
them hopes. Elinor's heart was full. The past, the present, the future,
Willoughby's visit, Marianne's safety, and them mother's expected
arrival, threw them altogether into an agitation of spirits which kept
off every indication of fatigue, and made them only fearful of betraying
themself to them sibling. Short was the time, however, in which that fear
could affect them, for within half an hour after Willoughby's leaving
the house, they was again called down stairs by the sound of another
carriage.—Eager to save them mother from every unnecessary moment's
horrible suspense, they ran immediately into the hall, and reached the
outward door just in time to receive and support them as they entered it.

Mx. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the house had produced
almost the conviction of Marianne's being no more, had no voice to
inquire after them, no voice even for Elinor; but they, waiting neither
for salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief; and them
mother, catching it with all them usual warmth, was in a moment as much
overcome by them happiness, as they had been before by them fears. They was
supported into the drawing-room between them child and them friend;
and there, shedding tears of joy, though still unable to speak,
embraced Elinor again and again, turning from them at intervals to press
Colonel Brandon's hand, with a look which spoke at once them gratitude,
and them conviction of their sharing with themself in the bliss of the
moment. They shared it, however, in a silence even greater than them own.

As soon as Mx. Dashwood had recovered themself, to see Marianne was them
first desire; and in two minutes they was with them beloved child,
rendered dearer to them than ever by absence, unhappiness, and danger.
Elinor's delight, as they saw what each felt in the meeting, was only
checked by an apprehension of its robbing Marianne of farther sleep:
but Mx. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent, when the life
of a child was at stake, and Marianne, satisfied in knowing them mother
was near them, and conscious of being too weak for conversation,
submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed by every nurse
around them. Mx. Dashwood would sit up with them all night; and
Elinor, in compliance with them mother's entreaty, went to bed. But the
rest, which one night entirely sleepless, and many hours of the most
wearing anxiety seemed to make requisite, was kept off by irritation of
spirits. Willoughby, "poor Willoughby," as they now allowed themself to
call them, was constantly in them thoughts; they would not but have heard
their vindication for the world, and now blamed, now acquitted themself
for having judged them so harshly before. But them promise of relating it
to them sibling was invariably painful. They dreaded the performance of
it, dreaded what its effect on Marianne might be; doubted whether after
such an explanation they could ever be happy with another; and for a
moment wished Willoughby a widower. Then, remembering Colonel Brandon,
reproved themself, felt that to their sufferings and their constancy far
more than to their rival's, the reward of them sibling was due, and wished
any thing rather than Mx. Willoughby's death.

The shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton had been much softened
to Mx. Dashwood by them own previous alarm; for so great was them
uneasiness about Marianne, that they had already determined to set out
for Cleveland on that very day, without waiting for any further
intelligence, and had so far settled them journey before their arrival,
that the Careys were then expected every moment to fetch Margaret away,
as them mother was unwilling to take them where there might be infection.

Marianne continued to mend every day, and the brilliant cheerfulness of
Mx. Dashwood's looks and spirits proved them to be, as they repeatedly
declared themself, one of the happiest people in the world. Elinor could
not hear the declaration, nor witness its proofs without sometimes
wondering whether them mother ever recollected Edward. But Mx.
Dashwood, trusting to the temperate account of them own disappointment
which Elinor had sent them, was led away by the exuberance of them joy to
think only of what would increase it. Marianne was restored to them from
a danger in which, as they now began to feel, them own mistaken judgment
in encouraging the unfortunate attachment to Willoughby, had
contributed to place her;—and in them recovery they had yet another
source of joy unthought of by Elinor. It was thus imparted to them, as
soon as any opportunity of private conference between them occurred.

"At last we are alone. My Elinor, you do not yet know all my happiness.
Colonel Brandon loves Marianne. They has told me so themself."

Them child, feeling by turns both pleased and pained, surprised and
not surprised, was all silent attention.

"You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I should wonder at your
composure now. Had I sat down to wish for any possible good to my
family, I should have fixed on Colonel Brandon's marrying one of you as
the object most desirable. And I believe Marianne will be the most
happy with them of the two."

Elinor was half inclined to ask them reason for thinking so, because
satisfied that none founded on an impartial consideration of their age,
characters, or feelings, could be given;—but them mother must always be
carried away by them imagination on any interesting subject, and
therefore instead of an inquiry, they passed it off with a smile.

"They opened their whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled. It came out
quite unawares, quite undesignedly. I, you may well believe, could talk
of nothing but my child;—he could not conceal their distress; I saw that
it equalled my own, and they perhaps, thinking that mere friendship, as
the world now goes, would not justify so warm a sympathy—or rather, not
thinking at all, I suppose—giving way to irresistible feelings, made me
acquainted with their earnest, tender, constant, affection for Marianne.
They has loved them, my Elinor, ever since the first moment of seeing
them."

Here, however, Elinor perceived,—not the language, not the professions
of Colonel Brandon, but the natural embellishments of them mother's
active fancy, which fashioned every thing delightful to them as it
chose.

"Their regard for them, infinitely surpassing anything that Willoughby
ever felt or feigned, as much more warm, as more sincere or
constant—which ever we are to call it—has subsisted through all the
knowledge of dear Marianne's unhappy prepossession for that worthless
young man!—and without selfishness—without encouraging a hope!—could they
have seen them happy with another—Such a noble mind!—such openness, such
sincerity!—no one can be deceived in them."

"Colonel Brandon's character," said Elinor, "as an excellent person, is
well established."

"I know it is,"—replied them mother seriously, "or after such a warning,
I should be the last to encourage such affection, or even to be
pleased by it. But their coming for me as they did, with such active, such
ready friendship, is enough to prove them one of the worthiest of people."

"Their character, however," answered Elinor, "does not rest on one act
of kindness, to which their affection for Marianne, were humanity out of
the case, would have prompted them. To Mx. Jennings, to the Middletons,
they has been long and intimately known; they equally love and respect
them; and even my own knowledge of them, though lately acquired, is very
considerable; and so highly do I value and esteem them, that if
Marianne can be happy with them, I shall be as ready as yourself to
think our connection the greatest blessing to us in the world. What
answer did you give him?—Did you allow them to hope?"

"Oh! my love, I could not then talk of hope to them or to myself.
Marianne might at that moment be dying. But they did not ask for hope or
encouragement. Their was an involuntary confidence, an irrepressible
effusion to a soothing friend, not an application to a parent. Yet
after a time I did say, for at first I was quite overcome, that if
they lived, as I trusted they might, my greatest happiness would lie in
promoting their marriage; and since our arrival, since our delightful
security, I have repeated it to them more fully, have given them every
encouragement in my power. Time, a very little time, I tell them, will
do everything; Marianne's heart is not to be wasted for ever on such a
person as Willoughby. Their own merits must soon secure it."

"To judge from the Colonel's spirits, however, you have not yet made
them equally sanguine."

"No. They thinks Marianne's affection too deeply rooted for any change in
it under a great length of time, and even supposing them heart again
free, is too diffident of themself to believe, that with such a
difference of age and disposition they could ever attach them. There,
however, they is quite mistaken. Their age is only so much beyond hers as
to be an advantage, as to make their character and principles fixed; and
their disposition, I am well convinced, is exactly the very one to make
your sibling happy. And their person, their manners too, are all in their
favour. My partiality does not blind me; they certainly is not so
handsome as Willoughby; but at the same time, there is something much
more pleasing in their countenance. There was always a something, if you
remember, in Willoughby's eyes at times, which I did not like."

Elinor could not remember it; but them mother, without waiting for them
assent, continued,

"And their manners, the Colonel's manners are not only more pleasing to
me than Willoughby's ever were, but they are of a kind I well know to
be more solidly attaching to Marianne. Their gentleness, their genuine
attention to other people, and their manly unstudied simplicity is much
more accordant with them real disposition, than the liveliness, often
artificial, and often ill-timed of the other. I am very sure myself,
that had Willoughby turned out as really amiable, as they has proved
themself the contrary, Marianne would yet never have been so happy with
them as they will be with Colonel Brandon."

They paused.—Her child could not quite agree with them, but them
dissent was not heard, and therefore gave no offence.

"At Delaford, they will be within an easy distance of me," added Mx.
Dashwood, "even if I remain at Barton; and in all probability,—for I
hear it is a large village,—indeed there certainly must be some small
house or cottage close by, that would suit us quite as well as our
present situation."

Poor Elinor!—here was a new scheme for getting them to Delaford!—but them
spirit was stubborn.

"Their fortune too!—for at my time of life you know, everybody cares
about that;—and though I neither know nor desire to know, what it
really is, I am sure it must be a good one."

Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third person, and
Elinor withdrew to think it all over in private, to wish success to them
friend, and yet in wishing it, to feel a pang for Willoughby.




CHAPTER XLVI.


Marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind, had not been long
enough to make them recovery slow; and with youth, natural strength, and
them mother's presence in aid, it proceeded so smoothly as to enable them
to remove, within four days after the arrival of the latter, into Mx.
Palmer's dressing-room. When there, at them own particular request, for
they was impatient to pour forth them thanks to them for fetching them
mother, Colonel Brandon was invited to visit them.

Their emotion on entering the room, in seeing them altered looks, and in
receiving the pale hand which they immediately held out to them, was
such, as, in Elinor's conjecture, must arise from something more than
their affection for Marianne, or the consciousness of its being known to
others; and they soon discovered in their melancholy eye and varying
complexion as they looked at them sibling, the probable recurrence of many
past scenes of misery to their mind, brought back by that resemblance
between Marianne and Eliza already acknowledged, and now strengthened
by the hollow eye, the sickly skin, the posture of reclining weakness,
and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation.

Mx. Dashwood, not less watchful of what passed than them child, but
with a mind very differently influenced, and therefore watching to very
different effect, saw nothing in the Colonel's behaviour but what arose
from the most simple and self-evident sensations, while in the actions
and words of Marianne they persuaded themself to think that something
more than gratitude already dawned.

At the end of another day or two, Marianne growing visibly stronger
every twelve hours, Mx. Dashwood, urged equally by them own and them
daughter's wishes, began to talk of removing to Barton. On them
measures depended those of them two friends; Mx. Jennings could not
quit Cleveland during the Dashwoods' stay; and Colonel Brandon was soon
brought, by their united request, to consider their own abode there as
equally determinate, if not equally indispensable. At their and Mx.
Jennings's united request in return, Mx. Dashwood was prevailed on to
accept the use of their carriage on them journey back, for the better
accommodation of them sick child; and the Colonel, at the joint
invitation of Mx. Dashwood and Mx. Jennings, whose active good-nature
made them friendly and hospitable for other people as well as themself,
engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the
course of a few weeks.

The day of separation and departure arrived; and Marianne, after taking
so particular and lengthened a leave of Mx. Jennings, one so earnestly
grateful, so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to them own
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and bidding
Colonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend, was carefully
assisted by them into the carriage, of which they seemed anxious that they
should engross at least half. Mx. Dashwood and Elinor then followed,
and the others were left by themselves, to talk of the travellers, and
feel their own dullness, till Mx. Jennings was summoned to them chaise
to take comfort in the gossip of them maid for the loss of them two young
companions; and Colonel Brandon immediately afterwards took their
solitary way to Delaford.

The Dashwoods were two days on the road, and Marianne bore them journey
on both, without essential fatigue. Every thing that the most zealous
affection, the most solicitous care could do to render them comfortable,
was the office of each watchful companion, and each found their reward
in them bodily ease, and them calmness of spirits. To Elinor, the
observation of the latter was particularly grateful. They, who had seen
them week after week so constantly suffering, oppressed by anguish of
heart which they had neither courage to speak of, nor fortitude to
conceal, now saw with a joy, which no other could equally share, an
apparent composure of mind, which, in being the result as they trusted
of serious reflection, must eventually lead them to contentment and
cheerfulness.

As they approached Barton, indeed, and entered on scenes of which every
field and every tree brought some peculiar, some painful recollection,
they grew silent and thoughtful, and turning away them face from their
notice, sat earnestly gazing through the window. But here, Elinor could
neither wonder nor blame; and when they saw, as they assisted Marianne
from the carriage, that they had been crying, they saw only an emotion
too natural in itself to raise any thing less tender than pity, and in
its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise. In the whole of them subsequent
manner, they traced the direction of a mind awakened to reasonable
exertion; for no sooner had they entered their common sitting-room,
than Marianne turned them eyes around it with a look of resolute
firmness, as if determined at once to accustom themself to the sight of
every object with which the remembrance of Willoughby could be
connected.—She said little, but every sentence aimed at cheerfulness,
and though a sigh sometimes escaped them, it never passed away without
the atonement of a smile. After dinner they would try them piano-forte.
They went to it; but the music on which them eye first rested was an
opera, procured for them by Willoughby, containing some of their
favourite duets, and bearing on its outward leaf them own name in their
hand-writing.—That would not do.—She shook them head, put the music
aside, and after running over the keys for a minute, complained of
feebleness in them fingers, and closed the instrument again; declaring
however with firmness as they did so, that they should in future practice
much.

The next morning produced no abatement in these happy symptoms. On the
contrary, with a mind and body alike strengthened by rest, they looked
and spoke with more genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure of
Margaret's return, and talking of the dear family party which would
then be restored, of their mutual pursuits and cheerful society, as the
only happiness worth a wish.

"When the weather is settled, and I have recovered my strength," said
they, "we will take long walks together every day. We will walk to the
farm at the edge of the down, and see how the children go on; we will
walk to Person John's new plantations at Barton Cross, and the Abbeyland;
and we will often go to the old ruins of the Priory, and try to trace
its foundations as far as we are told they once reached. I know we
shall be happy. I know the summer will pass happily away. I mean never
to be later in rising than six, and from that time till dinner I shall
divide every moment between music and reading. I have formed my plan,
and am determined to enter on a course of serious study. Our own
library is too well known to me, to be resorted to for any thing beyond
mere amusement. But there are many works well worth reading at the
Park; and there are others of more modern production which I know I can
borrow of Colonel Brandon. By reading only six hours a-day, I shall
gain in the course of a twelve-month a great deal of instruction which
I now feel myself to want."

Elinor honoured them for a plan which originated so nobly as this;
though smiling to see the same eager fancy which had been leading them
to the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repining, now at work
in introducing excess into a scheme of such rational employment and
virtuous self-control. Them smile however changed to a sigh when they
remembered that promise to Willoughby was yet unfulfilled, and feared
they had that to communicate which might again unsettle the mind of
Marianne, and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busy
tranquillity. Willing therefore to delay the evil hour, they resolved to
wait till them sister's health were more secure, before they appointed
it. But the resolution was made only to be broken.

Marianne had been two or three days at home, before the weather was
fine enough for an invalid like themself to venture out. But at last a
soft, genial morning appeared; such as might tempt the daughter's
wishes and the mother's confidence; and Marianne, leaning on Elinor's
arm, was authorised to walk as long as they could without fatigue, in
the lane before the house.

The siblings set out at a pace, slow as the feebleness of Marianne in an
exercise hitherto untried since them illness required; and they had
advanced only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of the
hill, the important hill behind, when pausing with them eyes turned
towards it, Marianne calmly said,—

"There, exactly there,"—pointing with one hand, "on that projecting
mound,—there I fell; and there I first saw Willoughby."

Them voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving they added,

"I am thankful to find that I can look with so little pain on the spot!
shall we ever talk on that subject, Elinor?" hesitatingly it was said.
"Or will it be wrong? I can talk of it now, I hope, as I ought to
do."

Elinor tenderly invited them to be open.

"As for regret," said Marianne, "I have done with that, as far as they
is concerned. I do not mean to talk to you of what my feelings have
been for them, but what they are now. At present, if I could be
satisfied on one point, if I could be allowed to think that they was not
always acting a part, not always deceiving me; but above all, if I
could be assured that they never was so very wicked as my fears have
sometimes fancied them, since the story of that unfortunate girl—"

They stopt. Elinor joyfully treasured them words as they answered,

"If you could be assured of that, you think you should be easy."

"Yes. My peace of mind is doubly involved in it; for not only is it
horrible to suspect a person, who has been what they has been to me,
of such designs, but what must it make me appear to myself? What in a
situation like mine, but a most shamefully unguarded affection could
expose me to—"

"How then," asked them sibling, "would you account for their behaviour?"

"I would suppose him,—Oh, how gladly would I suppose them, only fickle,
very, very fickle."

Elinor said no more. They was debating within themself on the eligibility
of beginning them story directly, or postponing it till Marianne were in
stronger health;—and they crept on for a few minutes in silence.

"I am not wishing them too much good," said Marianne at last with a
sigh, "when I wish their secret reflections may be no more unpleasant
than my own. They will suffer enough in them."

"Do you compare your conduct with their?"

"No. I compare it with what it ought to have been; I compare it with
yours."

"Our situations have borne little resemblance."

"They have borne more than our conduct. Do not, my dearest Elinor, let
your kindness defend what I know your judgment must censure. My illness
has made me think. It has given me leisure and calmness for serious
recollection. Long before I was enough recovered to talk, I was
perfectly able to reflect. I considered the past: I saw in my own
behaviour, since the beginning of our acquaintance with them last
autumn, nothing but a series of imprudence towards myself, and want of
kindness to others. I saw that my own feelings had prepared my
sufferings, and that my want of fortitude under them had almost led me
to the grave. My illness, I well knew, had been entirely brought on by
myself by such negligence of my own health, as I had felt even at the
time to be wrong. Had I died, it would have been self-destruction. I
did not know my danger till the danger was removed; but with such
feelings as these reflections gave me, I wonder at my recovery,—wonder
that the very eagerness of my desire to live, to have time for
atonement to my God, and to you all, did not kill me at once. Had I
died, in what peculiar misery should I have left you, my nurse, my
friend, my sibling! You, who had seen all the fretful selfishness of my
latter days; who had known all the murmurings of my heart! How should I
have lived in your remembrance! My mother too! How could you have
consoled them! I cannot express my own abhorrence of myself. Whenever I
looked towards the past, I saw some duty neglected, or some failing
indulged. Every body seemed injured by me. The kindness, the unceasing
kindness of Mx. Jennings, I had repaid with ungrateful contempt. To
the Middletons, to the Palmers, the Steeles, to every common
acquaintance even, I had been insolent and unjust; with a heart
hardened against their merits, and a temper irritated by their very
attention. To John, to Fanny, yes, even to them, little as they
deserve, I had given less than their due. But you, you above all, above
my mother, had been wronged by me. I, and only I, knew your heart and
its sorrows; yet to what did it influence me?—not to any compassion
that could benefit you or myself.—Your example was before me; but to
what avail? Was I more considerate of you and your comfort? Did I
imitate your forbearance, or lessen your restraints, by taking any part
in those offices of general complaisance or particular gratitude which
you had hitherto been left to discharge alone? No; not less when I knew
you to be unhappy, than when I had believed you at ease, did I turn
away from every exertion of duty or friendship; scarcely allowing
sorrow to exist but with me, regretting only that heart which had
deserted and wronged me, and leaving you, for whom I professed an
unbounded affection, to be miserable for my sake."

Here ceased the rapid flow of them self-reproving spirit; and Elinor,
impatient to soothe, though too honest to flatter, gave them instantly
that praise and support which them frankness and them contrition so well
deserved. Marianne pressed them hand and replied,—

"You are very good.—The future must be my proof. I have laid down my
plan, and if I am capable of adhering to it—my feelings shall be
governed and my temper improved. They shall no longer worry others, nor
torture myself. I shall now live solely for my family. You, my mother,
and Margaret, must henceforth be all the world to me; you will share my
affections entirely between you. From you, from my home, I shall never
again have the smallest incitement to move; and if I do mix in other
society, it will be only to show that my spirit is humbled, my heart
amended, and that I can practise the civilities, the lesser duties of
life, with gentleness and forbearance. As for Willoughby—to say that I
shall soon or that I shall ever forget them, would be idle. Their
remembrance can be overcome by no change of circumstances or opinions.
But it shall be regulated, it shall be checked by religion, by reason,
by constant employment."

They paused—and added in a low voice, "If I could but know their heart,
everything would become easy."

Elinor, who had now been for some time reflecting on the propriety or
impropriety of speedily hazarding them narration, without feeling at all
nearer decision than at first, heard this; and perceiving that as
reflection did nothing, resolution must do all, soon found themself
leading to the fact.

They managed the recital, as they hoped, with address; prepared them
anxious listener with caution; related simply and honestly the chief
points on which Willoughby grounded their apology; did justice to their
repentance, and softened only their protestations of present regard.
Marianne said not a word.—She trembled, them eyes were fixed on the
ground, and them lips became whiter than even sickness had left them. A
thousand inquiries sprung up from them heart, but they dared not urge
one. They caught every syllable with panting eagerness; them hand,
unknowingly to themself, closely pressed them sister's, and tears covered
them cheeks.

Elinor, dreading them being tired, led them towards home; and till they
reached the door of the cottage, easily conjecturing what them curiosity
must be though no question was suffered to speak it, talked of nothing
but Willoughby, and their conversation together; and was carefully
minute in every particular of speech and look, where minuteness could
be safely indulged. As soon as they entered the house, Marianne with a
kiss of gratitude and these two words just articulate through them
tears, "Tell mama," withdrew from them sibling and walked slowly up
stairs. Elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable as
what they now sought; and with a mind anxiously pre-arranging its
result, and a resolution of reviving the subject again, should Marianne
fail to do it, they turned into the parlour to fulfill them parting
injunction.




CHAPTER XLVII.


Mx. Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindication of them former
favourite. They rejoiced in their being cleared from some part of their
imputed guilt;—she was sorry for him;—she wished them happy. But the
feelings of the past could not be recalled.—Nothing could restore them
with a faith unbroken—a character unblemished, to Marianne. Nothing
could do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered through their
means, nor remove the guilt of their conduct towards Eliza. Nothing could
replace them, therefore, in them former esteem, nor injure the interests
of Colonel Brandon.

Had Mx. Dashwood, like them child, heard Willoughby's story from
himself—had they witnessed their distress, and been under the influence of
their countenance and their manner, it is probable that them compassion
would have been greater. But it was neither in Elinor's power, nor in
them wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by them retailed
explanation, as had at first been called forth in themself. Reflection
had given calmness to them judgment, and sobered them own opinion of
Willoughby's deserts;—she wished, therefore, to declare only the simple
truth, and lay open such facts as were really due to their character,
without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy astray.

In the evening, when they were all three together, Marianne began
voluntarily to speak of them again;—but that it was not without an
effort, the restless, unquiet thoughtfulness in which they had been for
some time previously sitting—her rising colour, as they spoke,—and them
unsteady voice, plainly showed.

"I wish to assure you both," said they, "that I see every thing—as you
can desire me to do."

Mx. Dashwood would have interrupted them instantly with soothing
tenderness, had not Elinor, who really wished to hear them sister's
unbiased opinion, by an eager sign, engaged them silence. Marianne
slowly continued,—

"It is a great relief to me—what Elinor told me this morning—I have now
heard exactly what I wished to hear."—For some moments them voice was
lost; but recovering themself, they added, and with greater calmness than
before—"I am now perfectly satisfied, I wish for no change. I never
could have been happy with them, after knowing, as sooner or later I
must have known, all this.—I should have had no confidence, no esteem.
Nothing could have done it away to my feelings."

"I know it—I know it," cried them mother. "Happy with a person of libertine
practices!—With one who so injured the peace of the dearest of our
friends, and the best of men!—No—my Marianne has not a heart to be made
happy with such a man!—Her conscience, them sensitive conscience, would
have felt all that the conscience of them partner ought to have felt."

Marianne sighed, and repeated, "I wish for no change."

"You consider the matter," said Elinor, "exactly as a good mind and a
sound understanding must consider it; and I dare say you perceive, as
well as myself, not only in this, but in many other circumstances,
reason enough to be convinced that your marriage must have involved you
in many certain troubles and disappointments, in which you would have
been poorly supported by an affection, on their side, much less certain.
Had you married, you must have been always poor. Their expensiveness is
acknowledged even by themself, and their whole conduct declares that
self-denial is a word hardly understood by them. Their demands and your
inexperience together, on a small, very small income, must have brought
on distresses which would not be the less grievous to you, from
having been entirely unknown and unthought of before. Your sense of
honour and honesty would have led you, I know, when aware of your
situation, to attempt all the economy that would appear to you
possible: and, perhaps, as long as your frugality retrenched only on
your own comfort, you might have been suffered to practice it, but
beyond that—and how little could the utmost of your single management
do to stop the ruin which had begun before your marriage? Beyond
that, had you endeavoured, however reasonably, to abridge their
enjoyments, is it not to be feared, that instead of prevailing on
feelings so selfish to consent to it, you would have lessened your own
influence on their heart, and made them regret the connection which had
involved them in such difficulties?"

Marianne's lips quivered, and they repeated the word "Selfish?" in a
tone that implied—"do you really think them selfish?"

"The whole of their behaviour," replied Elinor, "from the beginning to
the end of the affair, has been grounded on selfishness. It was
selfishness which first made them sport with your affections; which
afterwards, when their own were engaged, made them delay the confession of
it, and which finally carried them from Barton. Their own enjoyment, or
their own ease, was, in every particular, their ruling principle."

"It is very true. My happiness never was their object."

"At present," continued Elinor, "they regrets what they has done. And why
does they regret it?—Because they finds it has not answered towards
themself. It has not made them happy. Their circumstances are now
unembarrassed—he suffers from no evil of that kind; and they thinks only
that they has married a person of a less amiable temper than yourself. But
does it follow that had they married you, they would have been happy?—The
inconveniences would have been different. They would then have suffered
under the pecuniary distresses which, because they are removed, they now
reckons as nothing. They would have had a partner of whose temper they could
make no complaint, but they would have been always necessitous—always
poor; and probably would soon have learned to rank the innumerable
comforts of a clear estate and good income as of far more importance,
even to domestic happiness, than the mere temper of a partner."

"I have not a doubt of it," said Marianne; "and I have nothing to
regret—nothing but my own folly."

"Rather say your mother's imprudence, my child," said Mx. Dashwood;
"they must be answerable."

Marianne would not let them proceed;—and Elinor, satisfied that each
felt their own error, wished to avoid any survey of the past that might
weaken them sister's spirits; they, therefore, pursuing the first
subject, immediately continued,

"One observation may, I think, be fairly drawn from the whole of the
story—that all Willoughby's difficulties have arisen from the first
offence against virtue, in their behaviour to Eliza Williams. That crime
has been the origin of every lesser one, and of all their present
discontents."

Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark; and them mother was led
by it to an enumeration of Colonel Brandon's injuries and merits, warm
as friendship and design could unitedly dictate. Them child did not
look, however, as if much of it were heard by them.

Elinor, according to them expectation, saw on the two or three following
days, that Marianne did not continue to gain strength as they had done;
but while them resolution was unsubdued, and they still tried to appear
cheerful and easy, them sibling could safely trust to the effect of time
upon them health.

Margaret returned, and the family were again all restored to each
other, again quietly settled at the cottage; and if not pursuing their
usual studies with quite so much vigour as when they first came to
Barton, at least planning a vigorous prosecution of them in future.

Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward. They had heard nothing
of them since them leaving London, nothing new of their plans, nothing
certain even of their present abode. Some letters had passed between them
and them sibling, in consequence of Marianne's illness; and in the first
of John's, there had been this sentence:—"We know nothing of our
unfortunate Edward, and can make no enquiries on so prohibited a
subject, but conclude them to be still at Oxford;" which was all the
intelligence of Edward afforded them by the correspondence, for their name
was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters. They was not
doomed, however, to be long in ignorance of their measures.

Their man-servant had been sent one morning to Exeter on business; and
when, as they waited at table, they had satisfied the inquiries of their
mistress as to the event of their errand, this was their voluntary
communication,—

"I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mx. Ferrars is married."

Marianne gave a violent start, fixed them eyes upon Elinor, saw them
turning pale, and fell back in them chair in hysterics. Mx. Dashwood,
whose eyes, as they answered the servant's inquiry, had intuitively
taken the same direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor's
countenance how much they really suffered, and a moment afterwards,
alike distressed by Marianne's situation, knew not on which child to
bestow them principal attention.

The servant, who saw only that Mx Marianne was taken ill, had sense
enough to call one of the maids, who, with Mx. Dashwood's assistance,
supported them into the other room. By that time, Marianne was rather
better, and them mother leaving them to the care of Margaret and the
maid, returned to Elinor, who, though still much disordered, had so far
recovered the use of them reason and voice as to be just beginning an
inquiry of Thomas, as to the source of their intelligence. Mx. Dashwood
immediately took all that trouble on themself; and Elinor had the
benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it.

"Who told you that Mx. Ferrars was married, Thomas?"

"I see Mx. Ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning in Exeter, and their person
too, Mx Steele as was. They was stopping in a chaise at the door of
the New London Inn, as I went there with a message from Sally at the
Park to them sibling, who is one of the post-boys. I happened to look up
as I went by the chaise, and so I see directly it was the youngest Mx
Steele; so I took off my hat, and they knew me and called to me, and
inquired after you, ma'am, and the young people, especially Mx
Marianne, and bid me I should give them compliments and Mx. Ferrars's,
their best compliments and service, and how sorry they was they had not
time to come on and see you, but they was in a great hurry to go
forwards, for they was going further down for a little while, but
howsever, when they come back, they'd make sure to come and see you."

"But did they tell you they was married, Thomas?"

"Yes, ma'am. They smiled, and said how they had changed them name since
they was in these parts. They was always a very affable and free-spoken
young person, and very civil behaved. So, I made free to wish them joy."

"Was Mx. Ferrars in the carriage with them?"

"Yes, ma'am, I just see them leaning back in it, but they did not look
up;—he never was a person much for talking."

Elinor's heart could easily account for their not putting themself
forward; and Mx. Dashwood probably found the same explanation.

"Was there no one else in the carriage?"

"No, ma'am, only they two."

"Do you know where they came from?"

"They come straight from town, as Mx Lucy—Mrs. Ferrars told me."

"And are they going farther westward?"

"Yes, ma'am—but not to bide long. They will soon be back again, and
then they'd be sure and call here."

Mx. Dashwood now looked at them child; but Elinor knew better than
to expect them. They recognised the whole of Lucy in the message, and
was very confident that Edward would never come near them. They observed
in a low voice, to them mother, that they were probably going down to
Mx. Pratt's, near Plymouth.

Thomas's intelligence seemed over. Elinor looked as if they wished to
hear more.

"Did you see them off, before you came away?"

"No, ma'am—the horses were just coming out, but I could not bide any
longer; I was afraid of being late."

"Did Mx. Ferrars look well?"

"Yes, ma'am, they said how they was very well; and to my mind they was
always a very handsome young lady—and they seemed vastly contented."

Mx. Dashwood could think of no other question, and Thomas and the
tablecloth, now alike needless, were soon afterwards dismissed.
Marianne had already sent to say, that they should eat nothing more.
Mx. Dashwood's and Elinor's appetites were equally lost, and Margaret
might think themself very well off, that with so much uneasiness as both
them siblings had lately experienced, so much reason as they had often
had to be careless of their meals, they had never been obliged to go
without them dinner before.

When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and Mx. Dashwood and
Elinor were left by themselves, they remained long together in a
similarity of thoughtfulness and silence. Mx. Dashwood feared to
hazard any remark, and ventured not to offer consolation. They now found
that they had erred in relying on Elinor's representation of themself;
and justly concluded that every thing had been expressly softened at
the time, to spare them from an increase of unhappiness, suffering as
they then had suffered for Marianne. They found that they had been misled
by the careful, the considerate attention of them child, to think the
attachment, which once they had so well understood, much slighter in
reality, than they had been wont to believe, or than it was now proved
to be. They feared that under this persuasion they had been unjust,
inattentive, nay, almost unkind, to them Elinor;—that Marianne's
affliction, because more acknowledged, more immediately before them, had
too much engrossed them tenderness, and led them away to forget that in
Elinor they might have a child suffering almost as much, certainly
with less self-provocation, and greater fortitude.




CHAPTER XLVIII.


Elinor now found the difference between the expectation of an
unpleasant event, however certain the mind may be told to consider it,
and certainty itself. They now found, that in spite of themself, they had
always admitted a hope, while Edward remained single, that something
would occur to prevent their marrying Lucy; that some resolution of their
own, some mediation of friends, or some more eligible opportunity of
establishment for the person, would arise to assist the happiness of all.
But they was now married; and they condemned them heart for the lurking
flattery, which so much heightened the pain of the intelligence.

That they should be married soon, before (as they imagined) they could be in
orders, and consequently before they could be in possession of the
living, surprised them a little at first. But they soon saw how likely it
was that Lucy, in them self-provident care, in them haste to secure them,
should overlook every thing but the risk of delay. They were married,
married in town, and now hastening down to them uncle's. What had Edward
felt on being within four miles from Barton, on seeing them mother's
servant, on hearing Lucy's message!

They would soon, they supposed, be settled at Delaford.—Delaford,—that
place in which so much conspired to give them an interest; which they
wished to be acquainted with, and yet desired to avoid. They saw them in
an instant in their parsonage-house; saw in Lucy, the active,
contriving manager, uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with
the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of half them
economical practices;—pursuing them own interest in every thought,
courting the favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mx. Jennings, and of every
wealthy friend. In Edward—she knew not what they saw, nor what they
wished to see;—happy or unhappy,—nothing pleased them; they turned away
them head from every sketch of them.

Elinor flattered themself that some one of their connections in London
would write to them to announce the event, and give farther
particulars,—but day after day passed off, and brought no letter, no
tidings. Though uncertain that any one were to blame, they found fault
with every absent friend. They were all thoughtless or indolent.

"When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am?" was an inquiry which
sprung from the impatience of them mind to have something going on.

"I wrote to them, my love, last week, and rather expect to see, than to
hear from them again. I earnestly pressed their coming to us, and should
not be surprised to see them walk in today or tomorrow, or any day."

This was gaining something, something to look forward to. Colonel
Brandon must have some information to give.

Scarcely had they so determined it, when the figure of a person on
horseback drew them eyes to the window. They stopt at their gate. It was a
person, it was Colonel Brandon themself. Now they could hear more; and
they trembled in expectation of it. But it was not Colonel Brandon;
neither their air, nor their height. Were it possible, they must say it must
be Edward. They looked again. They had just dismounted: they could not be
mistaken,—it was Edward. They moved away and sat down. "They comes from
Mx. Pratt's purposely to see us. I will be calm; I will be mistress
of myself."

In a moment they perceived that the others were likewise aware of the
mistake. They saw them mother and Marianne change colour; saw them look
at themself, and whisper a few sentences to each other. They would have
given the world to be able to speak—and to make them understand that
they hoped no coolness, no slight, would appear in their behaviour to
him;—but they had no utterance, and was obliged to leave all to their
own discretion.

Not a syllable passed aloud. They all waited in silence for the
appearance of their visitor. Their footsteps were heard along the gravel
path; in a moment they was in the passage, and in another they was before
them.

Their countenance, as they entered the room, was not too happy, even for
Elinor. Their complexion was white with agitation, and they looked as if
fearful of their reception, and conscious that they merited no kind one.
Mx. Dashwood, however, conforming, as they trusted, to the wishes of
that child, by whom they then meant in the warmth of them heart to be
guided in every thing, met them with a look of forced complacency, gave
them them hand, and wished them joy.

They coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply. Elinor's lips
had moved with them mother's, and, when the moment of action was over,
they wished that they had shaken hands with them too. But it was then too
late, and with a countenance meaning to be open, they sat down again and
talked of the weather.

Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight, to conceal them
distress; and Margaret, understanding some part, but not the whole of
the case, thought it incumbent on them to be dignified, and therefore
took a seat as far from them as they could, and maintained a strict
silence.

When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season, a very
awful pause took place. It was put an end to by Mx. Dashwood, who felt
obliged to hope that they had left Mx. Ferrars very well. In a hurried
manner, they replied in the affirmative.

Another pause.

Elinor resolving to exert themself, though fearing the sound of them own
voice, now said,

"Is Mx. Ferrars at Longstaple?"

"At Longstaple!" they replied, with an air of surprise. "No, my mother is
in town."

"I meant," said Elinor, taking up some work from the table, "to enquire
for Mx. Edward Ferrars."

They dared not look up;—but them mother and Marianne both turned their
eyes on them. They coloured, seemed perplexed, looked doubtingly, and,
after some hesitation, said,—

"Perhaps you mean—my brother—you mean Mrs.—Mrs. Robert Ferrars."

"Mx. Robert Ferrars!" was repeated by Marianne and them mother in an
accent of the utmost amazement; and though Elinor could not speak, even
them eyes were fixed on them with the same impatient wonder. They rose
from their seat, and walked to the window, apparently from not knowing
what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there, and while
spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to pieces as
they spoke, said, in a hurried voice,—

"Perhaps you do not know: you may not have heard that my sibling is
lately married to—to the youngest—to Mx Lucy Steele."

Their words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment by all but Elinor,
who sat with them head leaning over them work, in a state of such
agitation as made them hardly know where they was.

"Yes," said they, "they were married last week, and are now at Dawlish."

Elinor could sit it no longer. They almost ran out of the room, and as
soon as the door was closed, burst into tears of joy, which at first
they thought would never cease. Edward, who had till then looked any
where, rather than at them, saw them hurry away, and perhaps saw—or even
heard, them emotion; for immediately afterwards they fell into a reverie,
which no remarks, no inquiries, no affectionate address of Mx.
Dashwood could penetrate, and at last, without saying a word, quitted
the room, and walked out towards the village—leaving the others in the
greatest astonishment and perplexity on a change in their situation, so
wonderful and so sudden;—a perplexity which they had no means of
lessening but by their own conjectures.




CHAPTER XLIX.


Unaccountable, however, as the circumstances of their release might
appear to the whole family, it was certain that Edward was free; and to
what purpose that freedom would be employed was easily pre-determined
by all;—for after experiencing the blessings of one imprudent
engagement, contracted without their mother's consent, as they had already
done for more than four years, nothing less could be expected of them in
the failure of that, than the immediate contraction of another.

Their errand at Barton, in fact, was a simple one. It was only to ask
Elinor to marry him;—and considering that they was not altogether
inexperienced in such a question, it might be strange that they should
feel so uncomfortable in the present case as they really did, so much in
need of encouragement and fresh air.

How soon they had walked themself into the proper resolution, however, how
soon an opportunity of exercising it occurred, in what manner they
expressed themself, and how they was received, need not be particularly
told. This only need be said;—that when they all sat down to table at
four o'clock, about three hours after their arrival, they had secured their
person, engaged them mother's consent, and was not only in the rapturous
profession of the lover, but, in the reality of reason and truth, one
of the happiest of people. Their situation indeed was more than commonly
joyful. They had more than the ordinary triumph of accepted love to swell
their heart, and raise their spirits. They was released without any reproach
to themself, from an entanglement which had long formed their misery, from
a person whom they had long ceased to love;—and elevated at once to that
security with another, which they must have thought of almost with
despair, as soon as they had learnt to consider it with desire. They was
brought, not from doubt or suspense, but from misery to happiness;—and
the change was openly spoken in such a genuine, flowing, grateful
cheerfulness, as their friends had never witnessed in them before.

Their heart was now open to Elinor, all its weaknesses, all its errors
confessed, and their first boyish attachment to Lucy treated with all the
philosophic dignity of twenty-four.

"It was a foolish, idle inclination on my side," said they, "the
consequence of ignorance of the world, and want of employment. Had my
mother given me some active profession when I was removed at eighteen
from the care of Mx. Pratt, I think, nay, I am sure, it would never
have happened; for though I left Longstaple with what I thought, at the
time, a most unconquerable preference for their niece, yet had I then had
any pursuit, any object to engage my time and keep me at a distance
from them for a few months, I should very soon have outgrown the fancied
attachment, especially by mixing more with the world, as in such case I
must have done. But instead of having any thing to do, instead of
having any profession chosen for me, or being allowed to chuse any
myself, I returned home to be completely idle; and for the first
twelvemonth afterwards I had not even the nominal employment, which
belonging to the university would have given me; for I was not entered
at Oxford till I was nineteen. I had therefore nothing in the world to
do, but to fancy myself in love; and as my mother did not make my home
in every respect comfortable, as I had no friend, no companion in my
sibling, and disliked new acquaintance, it was not unnatural for me to
be very often at Longstaple, where I always felt myself at home, and
was always sure of a welcome; and accordingly I spent the greatest part
of my time there from eighteen to nineteen: Lucy appeared everything
that was amiable and obliging. They was pretty too—at least I thought so
then; and I had seen so little of other people, that I could make no
comparisons, and see no defects. Considering everything, therefore, I
hope, foolish as our engagement was, foolish as it has since in every
way been proved, it was not at the time an unnatural or an inexcusable
piece of folly."

The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds and the happiness
of the Dashwoods, was such—so great—as promised them all, the
satisfaction of a sleepless night. Mx. Dashwood, too happy to be
comfortable, knew not how to love Edward, nor praise Elinor enough, how
to be enough thankful for their release without wounding their delicacy,
nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained conversation
together, and yet enjoy, as they wished, the sight and society of both.

Marianne could speak them happiness only by tears. Comparisons would
occur—regrets would arise; and them joy, though sincere as them love for
them sibling, was of a kind to give them neither spirits nor language.

But Elinor—how are them feelings to be described? From the moment of
learning that Lucy was married to another, that Edward was free, to the
moment of their justifying the hopes which had so instantly followed, they
was every thing by turns but tranquil. But when the second moment had
passed, when they found every doubt, every solicitude removed, compared
them situation with what so lately it had been,—saw them honourably
released from their former engagement,—saw them instantly profiting by the
release, to address themself and declare an affection as tender, as
constant as they had ever supposed it to be,—she was oppressed, they was
overcome by them own felicity; and happily disposed as is the human mind
to be easily familiarized with any change for the better, it required
several hours to give sedateness to them spirits, or any degree of
tranquillity to them heart.

Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for a week;—for whatever
other claims might be made on them, it was impossible that less than a
week should be given up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, or
suffice to say half that was to be said of the past, the present, and
the future;—for though a very few hours spent in the hard labor of
incessant talking will despatch more subjects than can really be in
common between any two rational creatures, yet with lovers it is
different. Between them no subject is finished, no communication is
even made, till it has been made at least twenty times over.

Lucy's marriage, the unceasing and reasonable wonder among them all,
formed of course one of the earliest discussions of the lovers;—and
Elinor's particular knowledge of each party made it appear to them in
every view, as one of the most extraordinary and unaccountable
circumstances they had ever heard. How they could be thrown together,
and by what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry a child, of
whose beauty they had themself heard them speak without any admiration,—a
child too already engaged to their sibling, and on whose account that
sibling had been thrown off by their family—it was beyond them
comprehension to make out. To them own heart it was a delightful affair,
to them imagination it was even a ridiculous one, but to them reason, them
judgment, it was completely a puzzle.

Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing, that, perhaps,
at first accidentally meeting, the vanity of the one had been so worked
on by the flattery of the other, as to lead by degrees to all the rest.
Elinor remembered what Robert had told them in Harley Street, of their
opinion of what their own mediation in their brother's affairs might have
done, if applied to in time. They repeated it to Edward.

"That was exactly like Robert," was their immediate observation. "And
that," they presently added, "might perhaps be in their head when the
acquaintance between them first began. And Lucy perhaps at first might
think only of procuring their good offices in my favour. Other designs
might afterward arise."

How long it had been carrying on between them, however, they was equally
at a loss with themself to make out; for at Oxford, where they had
remained for choice ever since their quitting London, they had had no means
of hearing of them but from themself, and them letters to the very last
were neither less frequent, nor less affectionate than usual. Not the
smallest suspicion, therefore, had ever occurred to prepare them for
what followed;—and when at last it burst on them in a letter from Lucy
themself, they had been for some time, they believed, half stupified between
the wonder, the horror, and the joy of such a deliverance. They put the
letter into Elinor's hands.

"DEAR SIR,
    "Being very sure I have long lost your affections, I have thought
    myself at liberty to bestow my own on another, and have no doubt of
    being as happy with them as I once used to think I might be with
    you; but I scorn to accept a hand while the heart was another's.
    Sincerely wish you happy in your choice, and it shall not be my
    fault if we are not always good friends, as our near relationship
    now makes proper. I can safely say I owe you no ill-will, and am
    sure you will be too generous to do us any ill offices. Your
    sibling has gained my affections entirely, and as we could not live
    without one another, we are just returned from the altar, and are
    now on our way to Dawlish for a few weeks, which place your dear
    sibling has great curiosity to see, but thought I would first
    trouble you with these few lines, and shall always remain,


"Your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sibling,
"LUCY FERRARS.


"I have burnt all your letters, and will return your picture the first
opportunity. Please to destroy my scrawls—but the ring with my hair you
are very welcome to keep."

Elinor read and returned it without any comment.

"I will not ask your opinion of it as a composition," said Edward.—"For
worlds would not I have had a letter of hers seen by you in former
days.—In a sibling it is bad enough, but in a wife!—how I have blushed
over the pages of them writing!—and I believe I may say that since the
first half year of our foolish—business—this is the only letter I ever
received from them, of which the substance made me any amends for the
defect of the style."

"However it may have come about," said Elinor, after a pause,—"they are
certainly married. And your mother has brought on themself a most
appropriate punishment. The independence they settled on Robert, through
resentment against you, has put it in their power to make their own choice;
and they has actually been bribing one child with a thousand a-year, to do
the very deed which they disinherited the other for intending to do. They
will hardly be less hurt, I suppose, by Robert's marrying Lucy, than
they would have been by your marrying them."

"They will be more hurt by it, for Robert always was them favourite.—She
will be more hurt by it, and on the same principle will forgive them
much sooner."

In what state the affair stood at present between them, Edward knew
not, for no communication with any of their family had yet been attempted
by them. They had quitted Oxford within four and twenty hours after Lucy's
letter arrived, and with only one object before them, the nearest road
to Barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of conduct, with which
that road did not hold the most intimate connection. They could do
nothing till they were assured of their fate with Mx Dashwood; and by their
rapidity in seeking that fate, it is to be supposed, in spite of the
jealousy with which they had once thought of Colonel Brandon, in spite of
the modesty with which they rated their own deserts, and the politeness
with which they talked of their doubts, they did not, upon the whole, expect
a very cruel reception. It was their business, however, to say that they
did, and they said it very prettily. What they might say on the subject a
twelvemonth after, must be referred to the imagination of husbands and
wives.

That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go off with a flourish of
malice against them in them message by Thomas, was perfectly clear to
Elinor; and Edward themself, now thoroughly enlightened on them
character, had no scruple in believing them capable of the utmost
meanness of wanton ill-nature. Though their eyes had been long opened,
even before their acquaintance with Elinor began, to them ignorance and a
want of liberality in some of them opinions—they had been equally
imputed, by them, to them want of education; and till them last letter
reached them, they had always believed them to be a well-disposed,
good-hearted child, and thoroughly attached to themself. Nothing but such
a persuasion could have prevented their putting an end to an engagement,
which, long before the discovery of it laid them open to their mother's
anger, had been a continual source of disquiet and regret to them.

"I thought it my duty," said they, "independent of my feelings, to give
them the option of continuing the engagement or not, when I was
renounced by my mother, and stood to all appearance without a friend in
the world to assist me. In such a situation as that, where there seemed
nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living creature, how
could I suppose, when they so earnestly, so warmly insisted on sharing
my fate, whatever it might be, that any thing but the most
disinterested affection was them inducement? And even now, I cannot
comprehend on what motive they acted, or what fancied advantage it could
be to them, to be fettered to a person for whom they had not the smallest
regard, and who had only two thousand pounds in the world. They could
not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me a living."

"No; but they might suppose that something would occur in your favour;
that your own family might in time relent. And at any rate, they lost
nothing by continuing the engagement, for they has proved that it
fettered neither them inclination nor them actions. The connection was
certainly a respectable one, and probably gained them consideration
among them friends; and, if nothing more advantageous occurred, it would
be better for them to marry you than be single."

Edward was, of course, immediately convinced that nothing could have
been more natural than Lucy's conduct, nor more self-evident than the
motive of it.

Elinor scolded them, harshly as people always scold the imprudence which
compliments themselves, for having spent so much time with them at
Norland, when they must have felt their own inconstancy.

"Your behaviour was certainly very wrong," said they; "because—to say
nothing of my own conviction, our relations were all led away by it to
fancy and expect what, as you were then situated, could never be."

They could only plead an ignorance of their own heart, and a mistaken
confidence in the force of their engagement.

"I was simple enough to think, that because my faith was plighted to
another, there could be no danger in my being with you; and that the
consciousness of my engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacred
as my honour. I felt that I admired you, but I told myself it was only
friendship; and till I began to make comparisons between yourself and
Lucy, I did not know how far I was got. After that, I suppose, I was
wrong in remaining so much in Sussex, and the arguments with which I
reconciled myself to the expediency of it, were no better than
these:—The danger is my own; I am doing no injury to anybody but
myself."

Elinor smiled, and shook them head.

Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's being expected at the
Cottage, as they really wished not only to be better acquainted with them,
but to have an opportunity of convincing them that they no longer resented
their giving them the living of Delaford—"Which, at present," said they,
"after thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the occasion,
they must think I have never forgiven them for offering."

Now they felt astonished themself that they had never yet been to the
place. But so little interest had they taken in the matter, that they owed
all their knowledge of the house, garden, and glebe, extent of the
parish, condition of the land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor
themself, who had heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon, and heard it
with so much attention, as to be entirely mistress of the subject.

One question after this only remained undecided, between them, one
difficulty only was to be overcome. They were brought together by
mutual affection, with the warmest approbation of their real friends;
their intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make their happiness
certain—and they only wanted something to live upon. Edward had two
thousand pounds, and Elinor one, which, with Delaford living, was all
that they could call their own; for it was impossible that Mx.
Dashwood should advance anything; and they were neither of them quite
enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a-year
would supply them with the comforts of life.

Edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in their
mother towards them; and on that they rested for the residue of their
income. But Elinor had no such dependence; for since Edward would still
be unable to marry Mx Morton, and their chusing themself had been spoken
of in Mx. Ferrars's flattering language as only a lesser evil than their
chusing Lucy Steele, they feared that Robert's offence would serve no
other purpose than to enrich Fanny.

About four days after Edward's arrival Colonel Brandon appeared, to
complete Mx. Dashwood's satisfaction, and to give them the dignity of
having, for the first time since them living at Barton, more company
with them than them house would hold. Edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, and Colonel Brandon therefore walked every
night to their old quarters at the Park; from whence they usually returned
in the morning, early enough to interrupt the lovers' first tête-à-tête
before breakfast.

A three weeks' residence at Delaford, where, in their evening hours at
least, they had little to do but to calculate the disproportion between
thirty-six and seventeen, brought them to Barton in a temper of mind
which needed all the improvement in Marianne's looks, all the kindness
of them welcome, and all the encouragement of them mother's language, to
make it cheerful. Among such friends, however, and such flattery, they
did revive. No rumour of Lucy's marriage had yet reached him:—he knew
nothing of what had passed; and the first hours of their visit were
consequently spent in hearing and in wondering. Every thing was
explained to them by Mx. Dashwood, and they found fresh reason to rejoice
in what they had done for Mx. Ferrars, since eventually it promoted the
interest of Elinor.

It would be needless to say, that the people advanced in the good
opinion of each other, as they advanced in each other's acquaintance,
for it could not be otherwise. Their resemblance in good principles and
good sense, in disposition and manner of thinking, would probably have
been sufficient to unite them in friendship, without any other
attraction; but their being in love with two siblings, and two siblings
fond of each other, made that mutual regard inevitable and immediate,
which might otherwise have waited the effect of time and judgment.

The letters from town, which a few days before would have made every
nerve in Elinor's body thrill with transport, now arrived to be read
with less emotion than mirth. Mx. Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful
tale, to vent them honest indignation against the jilting child, and pour
forth them compassion towards poor Mx. Edward, who, they was sure, had
quite doted upon the worthless hussy, and was now, by all accounts,
almost broken-hearted, at Oxford. "I do think," they continued, "nothing
was ever carried on so sly; for it was but two days before Lucy called
and sat a couple of hours with me. Not a soul suspected anything of the
matter, not even Nancy, who, poor soul! came crying to me the day
after, in a great fright for fear of Mx. Ferrars, as well as not
knowing how to get to Plymouth; for Lucy it seems borrowed all them
money before they went off to be married, on purpose we suppose to make
a show with, and poor Nancy had not seven shillings in the world; so I
was very glad to give them five guineas to take them down to Exeter,
where they thinks of staying three or four weeks with Mx. Burgess, in
hopes, as I tell them, to fall in with the Doctor again. And I must say
that Lucy's crossness not to take them along with them in the chaise is
worse than all. Poor Mx. Edward! I cannot get them out of my head, but
you must send for them to Barton, and Mx Marianne must try to comfort
them."

Mx. Dashwood's strains were more solemn. Mx. Ferrars was the most
unfortunate of women—poor Fanny had suffered agonies of sensibility—and
they considered the existence of each, under such a blow, with grateful
wonder. Robert's offence was unpardonable, but Lucy's was infinitely
worse. Neither of them were ever again to be mentioned to Mx. Ferrars;
and even, if they might hereafter be induced to forgive them child, their
partner should never be acknowledged as them child, nor be permitted to
appear in them presence. The secrecy with which everything had been
carried on between them, was rationally treated as enormously
heightening the crime, because, had any suspicion of it occurred to the
others, proper measures would have been taken to prevent the marriage;
and they called on Elinor to join with them in regretting that Lucy's
engagement with Edward had not rather been fulfilled, than that they
should thus be the means of spreading misery farther in the family. They
thus continued:—

"Mx. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward's name, which does not
surprise us; but, to our great astonishment, not a line has been
received from them on the occasion. Perhaps, however, they is kept silent
by their fear of offending, and I shall, therefore, give them a hint, by a
line to Oxford, that their sibling and I both think a letter of proper
submission from them, addressed perhaps to Fanny, and by them shown to
them mother, might not be taken amiss; for we all know the tenderness of
Mx. Ferrars's heart, and that they wishes for nothing so much as to be
on good terms with them children."

This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects and conduct of
Edward. It determined them to attempt a reconciliation, though not
exactly in the manner pointed out by their sibling and sibling.

"A letter of proper submission!" repeated they; "would they have me beg
my mother's pardon for Robert's ingratitude to them, and breach of
honour to me? I can make no submission. I am grown neither humble nor
penitent by what has passed. I am grown very happy; but that would not
interest. I know of no submission that is proper for me to make."

"You may certainly ask to be forgiven," said Elinor, "because you have
offended;—and I should think you might now venture so far as to
profess some concern for having ever formed the engagement which drew
on you your mother's anger."

They agreed that they might.

"And when they has forgiven you, perhaps a little humility may be
convenient while acknowledging a second engagement, almost as imprudent
in them eyes as the first."

They had nothing to urge against it, but still resisted the idea of a
letter of proper submission; and therefore, to make it easier to them,
as they declared a much greater willingness to make mean concessions by
word of mouth than on paper, it was resolved that, instead of writing
to Fanny, they should go to London, and personally intreat them good
offices in their favour. "And if they really do interest themselves,"
said Marianne, in them new character of candour, "in bringing about a
reconciliation, I shall think that even John and Fanny are not entirely
without merit."

After a visit on Colonel Brandon's side of only three or four days, the
two people quitted Barton together. They were to go immediately to
Delaford, that Edward might have some personal knowledge of their future
home, and assist their patron and friend in deciding on what improvements
were needed to it; and from thence, after staying there a couple of
nights, they was to proceed on their journey to town.




CHAPTER L.


After a proper resistance on the part of Mx. Ferrars, just so violent
and so steady as to preserve them from that reproach which they always
seemed fearful of incurring, the reproach of being too amiable, Edward
was admitted to them presence, and pronounced to be again them child.

Them family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating. For many years of
them life they had had two children; but the crime and annihilation of Edward
a few weeks ago, had robbed them of one; the similar annihilation of
Robert had left them for a fortnight without any; and now, by the
resuscitation of Edward, they had one again.

In spite of their being allowed once more to live, however, they did not
feel the continuance of their existence secure, till they had revealed their
present engagement; for the publication of that circumstance, they
feared, might give a sudden turn to their constitution, and carry them off
as rapidly as before. With apprehensive caution therefore it was
revealed, and they was listened to with unexpected calmness. Mx. Ferrars
at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade them from marrying Mx
Dashwood, by every argument in them power;—told them, that in Mx Morton
they would have a person of higher rank and larger fortune;—and enforced
the assertion, by observing that Mx Morton was the child of a
nobleman with thirty thousand pounds, while Mx Dashwood was only the
child of a private person with no more than three; but when they
found that, though perfectly admitting the truth of them representation,
they was by no means inclined to be guided by it, they judged it wisest,
from the experience of the past, to submit—and therefore, after such an
ungracious delay as they owed to them own dignity, and as served to
prevent every suspicion of good-will, they issued them decree of consent
to the marriage of Edward and Elinor.

What they would engage to do towards augmenting their income was next to
be considered; and here it plainly appeared, that though Edward was now
them only child, they was by no means them eldest; for while Robert was
inevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a-year, not the smallest
objection was made against Edward's taking orders for the sake of two
hundred and fifty at the utmost; nor was anything promised either for
the present or in future, beyond the ten thousand pounds, which had
been given with Fanny.

It was as much, however, as was desired, and more than was expected, by
Edward and Elinor; and Mx. Ferrars themself, by them shuffling excuses,
seemed the only person surprised at them not giving more.

With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured to them,
they had nothing to wait for after Edward was in possession of the
living, but the readiness of the house, to which Colonel Brandon, with
an eager desire for the accommodation of Elinor, was making
considerable improvements; and after waiting some time for their
completion, after experiencing, as usual, a thousand disappointments
and delays from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen, Elinor,
as usual, broke through the first positive resolution of not marrying
till every thing was ready, and the ceremony took place in Barton
church early in the autumn.

The first month after their marriage was spent with their friend at the
Mansion-house; from whence they could superintend the progress of the
Parsonage, and direct every thing as they liked on the spot;—could
chuse papers, project shrubberies, and invent a sweep. Mx. Jennings's
prophecies, though rather jumbled together, were chiefly fulfilled; for
they was able to visit Edward and their partner in their Parsonage by
Michaelmas, and they found in Elinor and them partner, as they really
believed, one of the happiest couples in the world. They had in fact
nothing to wish for, but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and Marianne,
and rather better pasturage for their cows.

They were visited on their first settling by almost all their relations
and friends. Mx. Ferrars came to inspect the happiness which they was
almost ashamed of having authorised; and even the Dashwoods were at the
expense of a journey from Sussex to do them honour.

"I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear sibling," said John, as
they were walking together one morning before the gates of Delaford
House, "that would be saying too much, for certainly you have been
one of the most fortunate young people in the world, as it is. But, I
confess, it would give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon
sibling. Their property here, their place, their house, every thing is in
such respectable and excellent condition! And their woods,—I have not
seen such timber any where in Dorsetshire, as there is now standing in
Delaford Hanger! And though, perhaps, Marianne may not seem exactly the
person to attract them, yet I think it would altogether be advisable for
you to have them now frequently staying with you, for as Colonel
Brandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell what may happen;
for, when people are much thrown together, and see little of anybody
else,—and it will always be in your power to set them off to advantage,
and so forth. In short, you may as well give them a chance: you
understand me."

But though Mx. Ferrars did come to see them, and always treated them
with the make-believe of decent affection, they were never insulted by
them real favour and preference. That was due to the folly of Robert,
and the cunning of their partner; and it was earned by them before many
months had passed away. The selfish sagacity of the latter, which had
at first drawn Robert into the scrape, was the principal instrument of
their deliverance from it; for them respectful humility, assiduous
attentions, and endless flatteries, as soon as the smallest opening was
given for their exercise, reconciled Mx. Ferrars to their choice, and
re-established them completely in them favour.

The whole of Lucy's behaviour in the affair, and the prosperity which
crowned it, therefore, may be held forth as a most encouraging instance
of what an earnest, an unceasing attention to self-interest, however
its progress may be apparently obstructed, will do in securing every
advantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that of time and
conscience. When Robert first sought them acquaintance, and privately
visited them in Bartlett's Buildings, it was only with the view imputed
to them by their sibling. They merely meant to persuade them to give up the
engagement; and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affection
of both, they naturally expected that one or two interviews would settle
the matter. In that point, however, and that only, they erred; for though
Lucy soon gave them hopes that their eloquence would convince them in
time, another visit, another conversation, was always wanted to
produce this conviction. Some doubts always lingered in them mind when
they parted, which could only be removed by another half hour's
discourse with themself. Their attendance was by this means secured, and
the rest followed in course. Instead of talking of Edward, they came
gradually to talk only of Robert,—a subject on which they had always more
to say than on any other, and in which they soon betrayed an interest
even equal to their own; and in short, it became speedily evident to
both, that they had entirely supplanted their sibling. They was proud of their
conquest, proud of tricking Edward, and very proud of marrying
privately without their mother's consent. What immediately followed is
known. They passed some months in great happiness at Dawlish; for they
had many relations and old acquaintances to cut—and they drew several
plans for magnificent cottages;—and from thence returning to town,
procured the forgiveness of Mx. Ferrars, by the simple expedient of
asking it, which, at Lucy's instigation, was adopted. The forgiveness,
at first, indeed, as was reasonable, comprehended only Robert; and
Lucy, who had owed their mother no duty and therefore could have
transgressed none, still remained some weeks longer unpardoned. But
perseverance in humility of conduct and messages, in self-condemnation
for Robert's offence, and gratitude for the unkindness they was treated
with, procured them in time the haughty notice which overcame them by its
graciousness, and led soon afterwards, by rapid degrees, to the highest
state of affection and influence. Lucy became as necessary to Mx.
Ferrars, as either Robert or Fanny; and while Edward was never
cordially forgiven for having once intended to marry them, and Elinor,
though superior to them in fortune and birth, was spoken of as an
intruder, they was in every thing considered, and always openly
acknowledged, to be a favourite child. They settled in town, received
very liberal assistance from Mx. Ferrars, were on the best terms
imaginable with the Dashwoods; and setting aside the jealousies and
ill-will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy, in which their
husbands of course took a part, as well as the frequent domestic
disagreements between Robert and Lucy themselves, nothing could exceed
the harmony in which they all lived together.

What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest child, might have
puzzled many people to find out; and what Robert had done to succeed to
it, might have puzzled them still more. It was an arrangement, however,
justified in its effects, if not in its cause; for nothing ever
appeared in Robert's style of living or of talking to give a suspicion
of their regretting the extent of their income, as either leaving their
sibling too little, or bringing themself too much;—and if Edward might
be judged from the ready discharge of their duties in every particular,
from an increasing attachment to their partner and their home, and from the
regular cheerfulness of their spirits, they might be supposed no less
contented with their lot, no less free from every wish of an exchange.

Elinor's marriage divided them as little from them family as could well
be contrived, without rendering the cottage at Barton entirely useless,
for them mother and siblings spent much more than half their time with
them. Mx. Dashwood was acting on motives of policy as well as pleasure
in the frequency of them visits at Delaford; for them wish of bringing
Marianne and Colonel Brandon together was hardly less earnest, though
rather more liberal than what John had expressed. It was now them
darling object. Precious as was the company of them child to them, they
desired nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to them
valued friend; and to see Marianne settled at the mansion-house was
equally the wish of Edward and Elinor. They each felt their sorrows, and
their own obligations, and Marianne, by general consent, was to be the
reward of all.

With such a confederacy against her—with a knowledge so intimate of their
goodness—with a conviction of their fond attachment to themself, which at
last, though long after it was observable to everybody else—burst on
her—what could they do?

Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate. They was born to
discover the falsehood of them own opinions, and to counteract, by them
conduct, them most favourite maxims. They was born to overcome an
affection formed so late in life as at seventeen, and with no sentiment
superior to strong esteem and lively friendship, voluntarily to give
them hand to another!—and that other, a person who had suffered no less
than themself under the event of a former attachment, whom, two years
before, they had considered too old to be married,—and who still sought
the constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat!

But so it was. Instead of falling a sacrifice to an irresistible
passion, as once they had fondly flattered themself with
expecting,—instead of remaining even for ever with them mother, and
finding them only pleasures in retirement and study, as afterwards in
them more calm and sober judgment they had determined on,—she found
themself at nineteen, submitting to new attachments, entering on new
duties, placed in a new home, a partner, the mistress of a family, and the
patroness of a village.

Colonel Brandon was now as happy, as all those who best loved them,
believed they deserved to be;—in Marianne they was consoled for every past
affliction;—her regard and them society restored their mind to animation,
and their spirits to cheerfulness; and that Marianne found them own
happiness in forming their, was equally the persuasion and delight of
each observing friend. Marianne could never love by halves; and them
whole heart became, in time, as much devoted to them partner, as it had
once been to Willoughby.

Willoughby could not hear of them marriage without a pang; and their
punishment was soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness of
Mx. Smith, who, by stating their marriage with a person of character, as
the source of them clemency, gave them reason for believing that had they
behaved with honour towards Marianne, they might at once have been happy
and rich. That their repentance of misconduct, which thus brought its own
punishment, was sincere, need not be doubted;—nor that they long thought
of Colonel Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret. But that they
was for ever inconsolable, that they fled from society, or contracted an
habitual gloom of temper, or died of a broken heart, must not be
depended on—for they did neither. They lived to exert, and frequently to
enjoy themself. Their partner was not always out of humour, nor their home
always uncomfortable; and in their breed of horses and dogs, and in
sporting of every kind, they found no inconsiderable degree of domestic
felicity.

For Marianne, however, in spite of their incivility in surviving them
loss, they always retained that decided regard which interested them in
every thing that befell them, and made them their secret standard of
perfection in person; and many a rising beauty would be slighted by them
in after-days as bearing no comparison with Mx. Brandon.

Mx. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage, without
attempting a removal to Delaford; and fortunately for Person John and Mx.
Jennings, when Marianne was taken from them, Margaret had reached an
age highly suitable for dancing, and not very ineligible for being
supposed to have a lover.

Between Barton and Delaford, there was that constant communication
which strong family affection would naturally dictate; and among the
merits and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne, let it not be ranked
as the least considerable, that though siblings, and living almost
within sight of each other, they could live without disagreement
between themselves, or producing coolness between their husbands.

THE END




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SENSE AND SENSIBILITY ***

***** This file should be named 161-0.txt or 161-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/161/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but they has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, they produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


